## Resistance training

[Creating a well-designed, strategic, safe, and effective training
program can be a complicated process that is often required for
Certified Personal Trainers before they are able to assist their clients
in meeting their needs and goals. Careful consideration must be taken to
adequately meet the many facets of exercise principles, including any
manipulation of training variables throughout the planned program. By
adhering to certain fundamental principles, the fitness professional
needs to ensure that workout programs produce the desired outcomes. A
variety of essential training principles should guide the development of
effective training programs, especially resistance training. Programs
that fail to address these fundamental principles may be at risk for
lower exercise adherence and increased risk of injury.]{.mark}

[Fitness professionals must understand the fundamental principles,
scientific nature, and application of resistance training to be an
effective guide toward their client's results. It is with these
principles and application that designing safe, customized, and
individualized training will govern appropriate and obtainable
workouts.]{.mark}

**Principle of adaptation**

[One of the more unique features and traits of the human body is its
ability to adapt under various conditions, including stress,
environmental changes, and functional capacities. Resistance training
also elicits physical adaptations. Regardless of the primary goal of the
client, whether it is related to aesthetics or sports performance,
resistance training has been shown to exhibit significant favourable
outcomes.]{.mark}

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **[Physical and Performance Benefits]{.mark}**                      |
+==================================+==================================+
| [Improved cardiovascular         | [Increased neuromuscular control |
| efficiency]{.mark}               | (coordination)]{.mark}           |
|                                  |                                  |
| [Improved endocrine (hormone)    | [Increased connective tissue     |
| and cholesterol                  | (tendons, ligaments)             |
| adaptations]{.mark}              | strength]{.mark}                 |
|                                  |                                  |
| [Increased muscular hypertrophy  | [Increased muscular              |
| (larger muscles)]{.mark}         | endurance]{.mark}                |
|                                  |                                  |
| [Increased bone density]{.mark}  | [Increased muscular              |
|                                  | strength]{.mark}                 |
| [Increased metabolism]{.mark}    |                                  |
|                                  | [Increased power]{.mark}         |
| [Decreased body fat]{.mark}      |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

**General Adaptation Syndrome**

[The general adaptation syndrome (GAS) is the central theory governing
overall adaptation to training responses. GAS was first proposed in 1936
by Hans Selye, a Canadian physician. It is used to describe the process
of how an organism adapts when it is exposed to an acute, or even
damaging stimulus.]{.mark}

[According to this early model, damaging agents included excessive
muscular exercise, cold shock, or sublethal drug doses. However, within
the context of resistance exercise, the stress placed on the body is the
weight used during resistance training. This can be considered a good
form of stress called *eustress*, which helps the body adapt over time
and become better accustomed to resistance exercise. For adaptation to
occur, over time the body must be repeatedly confronted with a stressor,
or stimulus, creating the desired outcome for the response. The GAS
model outlines three stages of response to stress:]{.mark}

1.  [Alarm reaction]{.mark}

2.  [Resistance development]{.mark}

3.  [Exhaustion.]{.mark}

[Alarm reaction stage]{.underline}

[The first stage is known as the alarm reaction stage, which is the
initial reaction to a stressor. These reactions can include fatigue,
joint stiffness, or delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS). The alarm
reaction stage typically occurs 6 to 48 hours after initial injury to
the neuromuscular system. Over the course of 24 to 72 hours, when a
person begins a new training routine or unaccustomed exercise, muscles
may exhibit classic DOMS. During this period of DOMS, any attempt at
replicating or advancing the soreness-inducing exercise will be limited
by the factors contributing to the soreness. It is noteworthy to mention
that research indicates soreness as poorly correlated with the magnitude
of muscle damage. Specifically, it may provide a general indication that
muscle damage has occurred; however, it cannot be used as a sole
determinate of the extent of muscle damage. It is important for fitness
professionals to note that all types of muscle contractions and various
exercise programs induce aspects of muscle damage, particularly in
untrained individuals, especially when developing resistance training
programs for new or beginning clients. Therefore, it is important to
minimize DOMS by introducing resistance exercises in a gradual and
systematic fashion.]{.mark}

[The alarm reaction stage stimulates several physiological processes
within the body, including an increase in oxygen and blood supply,
neural recruitment to working muscles, bone formation, increased joint
load and tolerance, and connective tissue strengthening. It is believed
that if small doses of damaging stimuli were to persist, the injured
organism would develop a large resistance to the stimulus, and the
body's appearance and function would return to homeostasis. As such,
fitness professionals should apply the principle of progressive overload
to assist the body in overcoming unaccustomed stressors.]{.mark}

[Resistance development stage]{.underline}

[During the resistance development stage, numerous physiological changes
occur that ultimately lead to training adaptations that promote
increases in performance. After repeated training sessions, the human
body will increase its capability to efficiently recruit muscle fibres
and distribute oxygen and blood to the proper areas in the body. As
previously mentioned, applying the principle of progressive overload,
the body will increase its ability to meet the demands being placed on
it as a response to an additional stimulus.]{.mark}

[It is imperative that fitness professionals understand this adaptation
response. However, it must be emphasized that increasing load (i.e., the
amount of weight lifted) is only one example to increase the intensity
of an exercise program; many additional methods are used to increase
intensity.]{.mark}

[In the previous example of unaccustomed exercise, once DOMS has
decreased from the initial training session, subsequent soreness is
reduced, thereby enhancing repair and regeneration of muscle tissue,
resulting in the advancement of performance. Performance will continue
to improve until some new performance plateau is reached and will be
maintained if training is maintained.]{.mark}

[Exhaustion stage]{.underline}

[Prolonged stress or intolerable amounts of stress can lead to
exhaustion or distress. This can result in several negative consequences
such as the following:]{.mark}

- [Stress fractures]{.mark}

- [Muscle strains and ligament sprains]{.mark}

- [Joint pain]{.mark}

- [Emotional fatigue.]{.mark}

[Although many of these types of injuries can develop independently,
they can also lead to a combination of accumulated injury.]{.mark}

  --------------------- ------------------------------------------------------
   **[Stage]{.mark}**                   **[Reaction]{.mark}**

         [Alarm           [An initial reaction to stressor, such as fatigue,
    reaction]{.mark}               joint stiffness, or DOMS]{.mark}

       [Resistance      [Increased functional capacity to adapt to a stressor,
   development]{.mark}         such as increasing recruitment of muscle
                                            fibres]{.mark}

   [Exhaustion]{.mark}     [A prolonged intolerable stressor that produces
                          fatigue and leads to injury or a breakdown in the
                                            system]{.mark}
  --------------------- ------------------------------------------------------

[Resistance training, in addition to other forms of exercise, must be
cycled through different stages that increase stress placed on the body
but also allow for sufficient repair and regeneration to avoid the
exhaustion stage. Periodization is described as macromanagement, or
planned manipulation of training variables in an organized fashion to
improve performance over time. In other words, periodization is a
training program that is divided into smaller, progressive stages (i.e.,
training cycles). There is large variability between the lengths of each
training cycle because clients have unique physical abilities, goals,
and training schedules.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[*Overtraining* syndrome is a condition in which an athlete or fitness
client experiences fatigue, declining performance, and burnout. This is
a chronic condition and occurs primarily because of overly aggressive
training schedules; more particularly, it is a sequence of training
bouts that is abruptly increased, exists for an extended period, or
entails high-volume or high-intensity exercise with inadequate recovery
and regeneration.]{.mark}

[*Overreaching* is more of a temporary condition when compared to
overtraining syndrome. Like overtraining syndrome, overreaching also
involves decrements in performance, often as a result of fatigue. If
overreaching is not identified, it can lead to overtraining syndrome.
While these terms may sound the same, the subtle difference has to do
with the amount of time for performance restoration, not the type of
duration of training stress.]{.mark}

**The Principle of Specificity: the SAID Principle**

[The principle of specificity, often referred to as the SAID (specific
adaptation to imposed demands) principle, describes the body's responses
and adaptations to exercise and training. The body's adaptations are
specific to the type of exercise and muscle group(s) involved. For
example, if someone repeatedly lifts heavy weights, that person will
produce higher levels of maximal strength. Conversely, if a person
repeatedly lifts lighter weights for many repetitions, that person will
develop higher levels of muscular endurance. Some types of specificity
include the following:]{.mark}

- [Specificity of energy systems (anaerobic and aerobic)]{.mark}

- [Specificity of mode of training]{.mark}

- [Specificity of muscle groups and movement patterns]{.mark}

- [Posture specificity.]{.mark}

[This principle infers that one should aim to keep all training as
specific as possible. The fitness professional can use this principle
and apply it to training certain muscle groups, specific energy systems,
functional movement patterns, velocity of movement, or even particular
muscle actions (e.g., eccentric, concentric, isometric). One of the
biggest and most effective ways to apply specificity of training is to
identify specific movement patterns. Those sports that require high
velocity of movement should emphasize exercise movements that integrate
these patterns, such as plyometrics or power-based resistance exercises.
Overall, the more similarity that exists from the training program to
movement patterns, the greater can be the effect and transfer to
sport-related activities.]{.mark}

[An exception to this rule occurs when specific movement patterns
elevate risk of injury or exacerbate dysfunctional movements. When these
situations arise, exercises should be kept as specific as possible while
mitigating the risk of injury. For example, an athlete may require high
levels of power, but perhaps this same athlete lacks eccentric control
and displays poor landing mechanics when performing jump-landing tasks.
As such, the fitness professional must train the athlete in a systematic
fashion, first emphasizing eccentric control and proper landing
mechanics before progressing toward explosive movement patterns that are
necessary for their sport.]{.mark}

TRAINING TIP

[Remember that type I muscle fibres function differently than type II
muscle fibers. Type I (e.g., slow-twitch) muscle fibres are important
for muscles that need to produce long-term contractions necessary for
joint stabilization, endurance, and postural control. Type II
(fast-twitch) muscle fibres are larger in size, quick to produce maximal
tension, and fatigue more quickly than type I fibres. These fibres are
important for muscles producing movements requiring force and power,
such as performing a sprint. To train with higher intensities, proper
postural stabilization is required, and therefore, tissues need to be
trained differently to prepare them for higher levels of training. This
emphasizes the need for exercise programs to be both systematic and
progressive based on the ability level of the client, in addition to
following the principle of specificity.]{.mark}

**Mechanical, neuromuscular, and metabolic specificity**

[The previous section briefly discussed common types of specificity.
This section aims to provide more detail concerning mechanical,
neuromuscular, and metabolic specificity and how these specificities
relate to an exercise training program.]{.mark}

[The degree of adaptation applied during training is directly related to
the mechanical, neuromuscular, and metabolic specificity of the training
program. To effectively achieve program goals for clients, fitness
professionals need to consistently evaluate and manipulate exercise
routines to meet training goals.]{.mark}

- [Mechanical specificity refers to the weight and movements placed on
  the body. For example, the development of muscular endurance of the
  legs requires light weights and high repetitions when performing
  leg-related exercises. To develop maximal strength in the chest, the
  fitness professional must include the use of heavy weights during
  chest-related exercises.]{.mark}

- [Neuromuscular specificity refers to the speed of contraction and
  exercise selection. To develop higher levels of stability while
  pushing, chest exercises will need to be performed with controlled,
  unstable exercises and at slower speeds. To develop higher levels of
  strength, exercises should be performed in more stable environments
  with heavier loads to place more of an emphasis on strengthening the
  prime movers. Low-weight, high-velocity movements can develop higher
  levels of power.]{.mark}

- [Metabolic specificity refers to the energy demand placed on the body.
  To develop aerobic endurance, resistance training will require
  prolonged bouts of exercise, with minimal rest periods between sets.
  Endurance training primarily uses aerobic pathways to supply energy
  for the body. To develop maximal strength or power, resistance
  training programs require longer rest periods to replenish adenosine
  triphosphate (ATP), so the intensity of each exercise can remain high.
  Energy will be supplied primarily via the anaerobic pathways.]{.mark}

[It is important for fitness professionals to remember that a client's
training program should be designed to meet the specific demands of
their daily life, health, and wellness goals. The following example
applies the concept of specificity to a client whose goal is body fat
reduction.]{.mark}

1.  [Mechanically, the body burns more calories when movements are
    performed while standing, versus a seated or lying position, and
    using moderate weights. An example would be performing standing
    cable rows versus seated machine rows.]{.mark}

2.  [From a neuromuscular standpoint, the body burns more calories when
    more muscles are in use for longer periods in controlled, unstable
    environments. An example would be performing a standing dumbbell
    shoulder press versus a seated machine shoulder press.]{.mark}

3.  [Metabolically, the body burns more calories when rest periods are
    short to minimize full recuperation. An example would be to have
    clients perform resistance training exercises in a circuit fashion
    with little to no rest between sets.]{.mark}

[When applying the principles of specificity to a training program for
weight loss, the client should perform most exercises while standing and
using moderate weights. The client should also recruit and use as many
muscles as possible during each exercise and carefully monitor rest
periods for greater caloric expenditure.]{.mark}

**Progressive adaptations from resistance training**

[The concept of adaptation makes it clear that some type of change will
occur based on the stresses placed on the body. Resistance training
programs are designed to produce changes that result in various
adaptations. Whether the goal is to increase muscular endurance,
strength, hypertrophy, or power or to reduce body fat and improve
overall health, the use of resistance training is an important component
of any fitness program. This will help ensure optimal health and
longevity for the client. As clients develop greater strength and
endurance, they can train for longer periods before reaching the
exhaustion stage (e.g., GAS), which leads to greater degrees of change
and adaptation realized over time. The main adaptations that occur from
resistance training include stabilization, muscular endurance,
hypertrophy, strength, and power.]{.mark}

**Stabilization**

[Stabilization is the body's ability to provide optimal dynamic joint
support to maintain correct posture during all movements. In other
words, stabilization is getting the right muscles to fire, with the
right amount of force, in the proper plane of motion, and at the right
time to support our joints and spine. This requires high levels of
muscular endurance for optimal recruitment of prime movers to increase
concentric force production and reduce eccentric force. Repeatedly
training with controlled, unstable exercises increases the body's
ability to stabilize and balance itself. Conversely, if training is not
performed with controlled unstable exercises, clients may not gain the
same level of stability, and their joint stability may even worsen.
Research shows that improper stabilization can negatively affect a
muscle's force production. Stability is an important training adaptation
because it increases the ability of the body to stabilize the core and
joints during movement, thus allowing the arms and legs to work more
efficiently]{.mark}

TRAINING TIP

[Stabilization-focused resistance exercises are unstable in nature and
typically require a standing, single-leg stance, or use of a balance
modality. In other words, the client must support their spine and
posture with their core and joint stabilizers versus relying on
artificial support, such as a bench or machine. It is important to note
that the amount of instability should be client specific based on their
physical capabilities. This cannot be overemphasized:
stabilization-focused exercises should only introduce an amount of
instability that can be safely controlled by the client. The client must
be able to perform the exercises while maintaining ideal
posture.]{.mark}

[Additionally, stabilization-focused resistance exercises are not ideal
for developing muscular hypertrophy or maximal strength because heavier
loads are required, which necessitate a stable environment due to safety
concerns (Behm et al., 2010). But stabilization-focused resistance
exercises lay a solid foundation of core and joint stability, prior to
client attempts at advanced forms of strength training, and play an
integral role in a periodized training plan.]{.mark}

**Muscular endurance**

[Muscular endurance is the ability to produce and maintain force
production for prolonged periods of time. Developing and improving
muscular endurance is an integral component of all fitness programs; it
helps increase core and joint stabilization, which is the foundation on
which hypertrophy, strength, and power are built. Training for muscular
endurance of the core focuses on the recruitment of muscles responsible
for postural stability---namely, type I muscle fibres.]{.mark}

[Research has shown that resistance training protocols using high
repetitions are the most effective means of improving muscular
endurance. In addition, a periodization training program can enhance
local muscular endurance as well, and after an initial training effect
in previously untrained individuals, multiple sets of periodized
training may prove superior to single-set training for improving muscle
endurance. A relationship exists between increases in strength and local
muscular endurance, indicating that strength training alone may improve
endurance to a certain extent. However, specificity of training produces
the greatest improvements. Training to increase muscular endurance
implies that the individual performs many repetitions, which increases a
muscle's time under tension, and/or minimizes rest periods between
sets.]{.mark}

**Muscular hypertrophy**

[Muscular hypertrophy is the enlargement of skeletal muscle fibres in
response to being recruited to develop increased levels of tension, as
seen in resistance training. Muscle hypertrophy is characterized by an
increase in the cross-sectional area of individual muscle fibres
resulting from an increase in myofibril proteins, along with muscle
fibre anatomy and function. Although the visible signs of hypertrophy
may not be apparent for 4 to 8 weeks in an untrained client, the process
begins in the early stages of training, regardless of the intensity of
training used.]{.mark}

[Resistance training protocols that use a variety of repetition ranges,
with progressive overload, lead to muscular hypertrophy. Structured
progressive resistance training programs that use multiple sets lead to
increased muscular hypertrophy in both younger and older men and women
alike. 24 weeks of training for 3 days per week, with three sets of 8 to
12 repetitions per exercise, improved muscle hypertrophy and body
composition. Thus, progressive resistance training programs using a
variety of repetition protocols, with progressively higher loads and
sets, will result in increased hypertrophy in adults.]{.mark}

**Strength**

[Strength is the ability of the neuromuscular system to produce internal
tension, specifically in the muscles and connective tissues that pull on
the bones, to overcome an external force. Whether the external force
demands the neuromuscular system to produce stability, endurance,
maximal strength, or power, internal tension within the muscles is what
leads to force production. The degree of internal tension produced is
the result of strength adaptations. The specific form of strength or
internal tension, which is produced from training, is based on the type
and intensity of training used by the client; this refers back to the
principle of specificity.]{.mark}

[It can be argued that resistance training programs have traditionally
focused on developing maximal strength in individual muscles,
emphasizing one plane of motion, typically the sagittal plane. Because
all muscles function eccentrically, isometrically, and concentrically in
all three planes of motion (sagittal, frontal, and transverse) and at
different speeds, training programs should be designed using a
progressive approach. This approach emphasizes appropriate exercise
selection, multiple planes of motion, all muscle actions, and repetition
tempos.]{.mark}

[Because muscle operates under the control of the central nervous
system, strength needs to be considered, not as a function of muscle but
as a result of activating the neuromuscular (muscular + nervous) system.
Strength gains can occur rapidly in beginning clients and can increase
with a structured, progressive resistance training program. One factor
in increased strength is an increase in the number of motor units
recruited, especially early in a training program. Resistance training
increases the neural demand and recruitment of more muscle fibres until
a recruitment plateau is reached, after which further increases in
strength are a result of muscle fibre hypertrophy.]{.mark}

[Strength cannot be thought of in isolation. Strength is built on the
foundation of stabilization requiring muscles, tendons, and ligaments to
be prepared for the load that will be required to increase strength
beyond the initial stages of training. Whereas stabilization-focused
resistance training is designed with the characteristics of type I
slow-twitch muscle fibres in mind (slow-contracting, low-tension output,
and resistant to fatigue), strength-focused resistance training is
designed to match the characteristics of type II muscle fibres
(quick-contracting, high-tension output, prone to fatigue). Thus,
resistance training variables (sets, reps, intensities) are manipulated
to take advantage of the specific characteristics of each fibre type.
The majority of strength increases will occur during the first 12 weeks
of resistance training from increased neural recruitment and muscle
hypertrophy. Intermediate and advanced lifters will find it necessary to
carry out a more demanding program in terms of training volume and
intensity by following a sound periodized schedule.]{.mark}

**Power**

[Power is the ability of the neuromuscular system to produce the
greatest possible force in the shortest possible time. This is
represented by the simple equation of force multiplied by velocity
(force × velocity). Power adaptations build on stabilization and
strength adaptations and then apply them at more realistic speeds and
forces seen in everyday life and sporting activities. The focus of
power-resistance training lies in getting the neuromuscular system to
generate force as quickly as possible (rate of force
production).]{.mark}

[An increase in either force or velocity will produce an increase in
power. Training for power can be achieved by increasing the weight
(force), as seen in the strength adaptations, or increasing the speed
with which weight is moved (velocity). Power training allows for
increased rate of force production by increasing the number of motor
units activated, the synchronization between them, and the speed at
which they are activated. The GAS and principle of specificity both
dictate that to maximize training for this type of adaptation, both
heavy and light loads must be moved as fast as possible, yet in a safe
fashion. Thus, using both training methods in a superset fashion can
create the necessary adaptations to enhance the body's ability to
recruit a large number of motor units and increase the rate (speed) of
activation.]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[As mentioned previously, power can be defined as force × velocity.
However, another equation exists for power and is often used by sport
scientists and engineers.]{.mark}

[Power is defined as the rate at which work is performed. It is
calculated by dividing the amount of work performed by the length of
time to perform that work.]{.mark}

[Work ÷ Time]{.mark}

[Power can be measured in many forms (such as horsepower), but in the
context of human performance, the most common method of measurement is
watts.]{.mark}

**Acute variables**

[Acute variables, also known as exercise training variables, provide the
foundation of any exercise program. They determine the amount of stress
placed on the body and, ultimately, the physical adaptations that occur.
The information presented in this section further details all acute
variables and guides the fitness professional in the development of a
resistance training program. Acute variables include repetitions, sets,
training intensity, repetition tempo, rest intervals, training volume,
training frequency, training duration, exercise selection, and exercise
order.]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[Acute variables include the following:]{.mark}

- [Repetitions]{.mark}

- [Sets]{.mark}

- [Training intensity]{.mark}

- [Repetition tempo]{.mark}

- [Rest intervals]{.mark}

- [Training volume]{.mark}

- [Training frequency]{.mark}

- [Training duration]{.mark}

- [Exercise selection]{.mark}

- [Exercise order]{.mark}

[For continued adaptations and improvement, the fitness professional
must consider a periodized training approach and proper manipulation of
acute variables to reduce potential injury or overtraining while
facilitating sustained progress. Resistance training programs are often
designed through the lens of many disciplines: bodybuilding,
powerlifting, Olympic weightlifting, strength and conditioning, and
physical therapy. Moreover, resistance training programs vary
considerably by professionals in these categories. While the overall
breadth and depth of training experiences will largely dictate how well
a program is developed and executed, it is not the sole determinate of
client success. Designing a safe and effective resistance training
program requires a variety of skills, including knowledge gained through
continued education, personal interest in exercise, effective
communication, buy-in and relationship building, and working with a
variety of clientele.]{.mark}

[It is imperative for the Certified Personal Trainer to develop the
correct application and combination of exercise training knowledge,
experience, and skills to be competent at designing resistance training
programs for a variety of clients. At a minimum, fitness professionals
should be able to answer the following questions with confidence for all
their clients:]{.mark}

1.  [Which exercises are most appropriate for my client?]{.mark}

2.  [Which exercises are contraindicated for my client (i.e., should not
    be used)?]{.mark}

3.  [Which exercise intensities are appropriate for my client?]{.mark}

4.  [How many exercises are appropriate for my client?]{.mark}

5.  [How many sets and repetitions should my client perform?]{.mark}

6.  [How many days per week should my client train?]{.mark}

[Without possessing the appropriate knowledge and education to answer
these questions, the fitness professional may design inappropriate,
ineffective, or even unsafe programs for their clients.]{.mark}

### Acute variables of training

[Acute variables are the most fundamental components of designing a
training program, including resistance exercise. They determine the
specific demands placed on the body over the course of exercise
training. When applied during an exercise program, the acute variables
dictate these demands and the adaptations achieved. Properly
manipulating acute variables fosters structured and systematic program
planning to elicit optimal performance. To ensure proper development and
progression of a resistance training program, fitness professionals must
understand the acute training variables.]{.mark}

**Repetitions**

[Repetition refers to the number of times an exercise is completed, for
example, performing 15 repetitions of a biceps curl involves curling the
weight upward for a total of 15 times. Repetitions are inversely related
to the load lifted. For example, the heavier the load, the lower number
of repetitions can be achieved. Repetitions can be categorized as low (1
to 5), moderate (6 to 12), and high (12+).]{.mark}

**Sets**

[A set describes a group of repetitions that are performed
consecutively. The quantities of the other acute variables (i.e.,
repetitions and training intensity), as well as the fitness level of the
client, determine the number of sets that an individual will
perform.]{.mark}

[There is an inverse relationship between sets, repetitions, and
intensity. The individual usually performs fewer sets when performing
higher repetitions at a lower intensity (lighter weight) and more sets
when performing lower repetitions at a higher intensity (heavier
weight).]{.mark}

**Training intensity**

[Training intensity (i.e., load), as it relates to resistance training,
has been shown to substantially influence muscle hypertrophy and is
often argued as the single most important exercise variable for
stimulating muscle mass. Although intensity can be described as simply
the degree of effort involved with training, it is commonly expressed as
a percentage of one repetition maximum (1RM) and equates to the number
of repetitions that can be performed with a given weight.]{.mark}

[A client's physical capabilities, fitness level, nutritional status,
and goals determine the quantity of repetitions, sets, and training
intensity.]{.mark}

+----------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| **[Training          | **[Suggested Acute Variables\*]{.mark}**       |
| Adaptation]{.mark}** |                                                |
+:=====================+================================================+
| [Stabilization and   | [Moderate to high repetitions: \~12--20 or     |
| muscular             | higher]{.mark}                                 |
| endurance]{.mark}    |                                                |
|                      | [Low to moderate sets: \~1--3 sets]{.mark}     |
|                      |                                                |
|                      | [Low to moderate training intensities:         |
|                      | \~50--70% 1RM]{.mark}                          |
+----------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| [Muscular            | [Low to moderate repetitions: \~6--12 or       |
| hypertrophy†]{.mark} | higher]{.mark}                                 |
|                      |                                                |
|                      | [Moderate to high sets: \~3--6 sets]{.mark}    |
|                      |                                                |
|                      | [Moderate to high training intensities:        |
|                      | \~75--85% 1RM]{.mark}                          |
+----------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| [Maximal             | [Low repetitions: \~1--5]{.mark}               |
| strength]{.mark}     |                                                |
|                      | [High sets: \~4--6 sets]{.mark}                |
|                      |                                                |
|                      | [High training intensities: \~85--100%         |
|                      | 1RM]{.mark}                                    |
+----------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| [Power]{.mark}       | [Low to moderate repetitions: \~1--10]{.mark}  |
|                      |                                                |
|                      | [Moderate to high sets: \~3--6]{.mark}         |
|                      |                                                |
|                      | [Low training intensities: \~10% of bodyweight |
|                      | (when using a medicine ball) or \~30--45%      |
|                      | (when using weights)]{.mark}                   |
+----------------------+------------------------------------------------+

[\*The acute variables listed in this table are not absolutes. A
client's training program, goals, and fitness level dictate appropriate
acute variable selection.]{.mark}

[† Muscle hypertrophy adaptations can be attained with various
repetition, set, and intensity schemes depending on the total volume of
training and the client's fitness level (Borde et al., 2015; Lasevicius
et al., 2018).]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[Intensities (amount of weight) are generally expressed as a percentage
of a one-repetition maximum (1RM), but 1RM testing can be challenging to
do accurately. However, most repetition ranges for the fitness
adaptation are inversely related to %1RM intensities.]{.mark}

[For example, for stabilization and muscle endurance (50-70% 1RM
intensity), if you can complete 20 reps, with the final rep being
challenging, you can assume you are near 50% of your 1RM at that weight.
On the other hand, if form begins to break down at 12 reps, then you can
assume the weight is at or near 70% of your 1RM for that
exercise.]{.mark}

[So to keep things simple, you may often see intensity expressed as
something like \"12 RM\" to reflect the rep range that equates to the
desired intensity. To begin, find a weight you can comfortably do the
lift at for 12 repetitions, then progress accordingly from
there.]{.mark}

**Repetition tempo**

[Repetition tempo relates to the rate at which each repetition is
performed. Studies have analysed the effects of movement tempo on
adaptive processes in terms of strength, muscle power, or muscle
hypertrophy. Each of the forms of resistance training has been shown to
lead to hypertrophy or an increase in muscle strength. A slower movement
cadence is often used to stimulate muscle hypertrophy since faster
uncontrolled speeds are typically employed to develop strength and
power. Slower tempos are also used for the development of stabilization
and muscular endurance.]{.mark}

[The following practical example will help the fitness professional
understand how to read and interpret repetition tempo. A repetition
tempo uses a four-number system. Each number corresponds to the length
of time (in seconds) to perform a specific muscle action (eccentric,
isometric, concentric). The numbers are also listed in the following
named order regardless of the way in which the exercise is performed:
eccentric/isometric/concentric/isometric. For example, a push-up using a
4-2-1-1 tempo involves the following:]{.mark}

1.  [Lowering the body toward the floor for 4 seconds (eccentric
    action)]{.mark}

2.  [Pausing the body with the chest slightly above the floor for 2
    seconds (isometric contraction)]{.mark}

3.  [Pushing upwards and returning to the top position in 1 second
    (concentric contraction)]{.mark}

4.  [Pausing at the top position for 1 second before repeating the next
    repetition (isometric contraction)]{.mark}

[A barbell biceps curl using a 3-0-1-2 tempo involves the
following:]{.mark}

1.  [Curling up the barbell for 1 second (concentric
    contraction)]{.mark}

2.  [Pausing at the top for 2 seconds (isometric contraction)]{.mark}

3.  [Lowering the barbell for 3 seconds (eccentric action)]{.mark}

4.  [Pausing at the bottom position for 0 seconds before repeating the
    next repetition (isometric contraction)]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[Repetition tempos use the same four-numbered sequence no matter if the
exercise first starts with an eccentric movement, like a squat or bench
press, or a concentric movement, like a biceps curl or shoulder
press.]{.mark}

**Rest interval**

[A certain amount of rest is needed throughout a resistance training
session to optimize recovery between sets. The rest interval is the time
taken to recuperate between sets or exercises and has a dramatic effect
on the outcome of the training program. Each performed exercise requires
energy. The primary type of energy used during training, whether it is
anaerobic or aerobic, depends on the quantity, intensity of the
exercise, and the fitness level of the client.]{.mark}

[Muscular endurance is best described as the ability to maintain
repeated muscular contractions for a given period. As mentioned
previously, muscular endurance is best achieved when combining
relatively low to moderate loads (light to medium weight) with a
moderate to high number of repetitions (e.g., 12 to 20). The general
rest recommendation for muscular endurance is approximately 30 to 60
seconds between sets. But depending on the client's physical fitness
level, rest periods can be adjusted. It is important to point out that
it is sometimes difficult to maintain a given intensity when performing
this type of training. In such a case, the load should be reduced to
allow the appropriate repetition range to be performed for muscular
endurance adaptations to occur.]{.mark}

[Muscle hypertrophy occurs when the size or quantity of muscle cells
increases. The general recommendation for hypertrophy training is to
have moderate to high loads with wide ranging rest periods between
sets---approximately 0 to 180 seconds (Grgic et. al., 2017). Due to the
interaction of load and rest interval length, individuals may find it
challenging to maintain a given intensity while performing a series of
hypertrophy sets. If this occurs, it is suggested that the fitness
professional should reduce the load to allow a specific amount of
repetitions to be performed.]{.mark}

[Maximal strength adaptations are best achieved with relatively long
rest periods, depending on the client's level of fitness and intensity
of the exercises. Research provides insight that 3- to 5-minute rest
period lengths are perhaps more effective and safer, especially when
using multijoint movements.]{.mark}

[Power adaptations also require relatively long rest periods. When
training for power performance, the rest interval between sets should
correspond with the time needed for ATP replenishment. According to
research, this rest period is approximately 4 minutes long. Using this
research as a general guideline, because everyone is different, resting
for 3 to 5 minutes between sets seems logical and can allow for the
preservation of force and power production over multiple sets and reps.
By following these guidelines for power development, individuals may
minimize the effects of fatigue.]{.mark}

**Training volume**

[Although volume is not a part of the five components of fitness, it
heavily interacts with many other variables of training and thus
deserves to be addressed. Training volume is the sum of the repetitions
performed in a given set during each training session multiplied by the
resistance used. A set can be defined as the number of repetitions
performed repeatedly without rest, whereas exercise volume is the
product of total repetitions, sets, and load performed in a training
session. It is often seen simply as a formula: reps × sets × weight. It
has been reported that higher-volume, multiple-set protocols have
consistently proven their superiority over single-set protocols with
respect to increased muscle hypertrophy and strength.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[The five components of fitness include the following:]{.mark}

1.  [Cardiovascular endurance]{.mark}

2.  [Muscular strength]{.mark}

3.  [Muscular endurance]{.mark}

4.  [Flexibility]{.mark}

5.  [Body composition]{.mark}

[One key characteristic of training volume is that volume and intensity
must be strategically and systematically increased throughout all
training programs to avoid training plateaus and necessitate continued
progress. Training volume can be changed by altering the number of
exercises performed, repetitions performed, or sets performed for each
training session. Another key aspect of training volume is that volume
and intensity have an inverse relationship. As intensity increases,
volume usually decreases. As volume increases, intensity is often
reduced. This is frequently observed in variations and models of
periodization.]{.mark}

**Training frequency**

[Training frequency usually describes the total number of weekly
training sessions. Frequency is directly related to duration and
intensity of training and can vary depending on the client's goals,
preferences, and time limitations. There are numerous factors
influencing training frequency. These may include the type of exercise
performed, total involvement of muscle groups, the client's training
status, and overall structure of the program, with specific focus on
intensity and volume. In addition, the general lifestyle and social
habits of the client will also be an influential factor in frequency and
its implementation in the program. Fitness professionals may
accidentally implement a wide variety of training without considering
the way each factor stresses the client's workload. Therefore,
consideration of the workload must take precedence. A general
recommendation is to allow at least 1 day of rest between resistance
training sessions that stress identical muscle groups. Specific
recommendations are dependent on the client's overall training status:
beginner, intermediate, or advanced.]{.mark}

+-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| **[Resistance         | **[Recommended Frequency (Sessions per              |
| Training              | Week)]{.mark}**                                     |
| Status]{.mark}**      |                                                     |
+:======================+:====================================================+
| [Beginning or         | [2--3]{.mark}                                       |
| novice]{.mark}        |                                                     |
+-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| [Intermediate]{.mark} | [3 if using total body training sessions]{.mark}    |
|                       |                                                     |
|                       | [4 if using a split regimen (i.e., training         |
|                       | different muscle groups each session)]{.mark}       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| [Advanced]{.mark}     | [4--6; these individuals may perform many sessions  |
|                       | in a single day]{.mark}                             |
+-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+

**Training duration**

[Training duration describes the length of a training session. It is
important for the fitness professional to understand that duration and
intensity have an inverse relationship. Specifically, as the intensity
of an exercise session increases, the duration session will decrease.
Like many facets of training, there are other factors involved with
duration, such as client health status, training level, and program
goals. Volume and specific types of training are also key factors. In
most fitness-related scenarios, exercise sessions typically last between
30 and 90 minutes.]{.mark}

**Exercise selection**

[Exercise selection is of considerable importance when designing
resistance training programs. Exercise selection is often influenced by
these factors: specificity of training, availability of equipment,
training history, dedication to training, and time availability. For
example, performing multijoint exercises takes considerably more effort
than performing single-joint exercises (e.g., leg extension or bicep
curls). When employing exercise selection, the first factor to consider
is establishing the correct exercise technique. Regarding novice clients
with unaccustomed training technique or faulty movement patterns, the
fitness professional is mandated to provide excellent technique
demonstration and explanation and even allow an adequate adjustment
period for proper technique sequencing. This is often a good opportunity
for the Certified Personal Trainer to modify an exercise or teach a
movement pattern, to help build a solid foundation of exercise technique
prior to forthcoming programs. After careful review of these factors,
the fitness professional can offer exercise selections that maximize
training adaptations that address the client's specific training goals
and reduce the likelihood of injury.]{.mark}

[It is a well-accepted practice of performing large-muscle-mass
exercises prior to small-muscle mass exercises during resistance
training. The justification behind this training recommendation is
twofold. First, muscle force production for the entire training session
becomes significantly greater when multijoint or compound exercises are
performed before small-muscle groups. Second, when single-joint
exercises are performed first, the force production for larger muscle
mass exercises is reduced.]{.mark}

[In addition, multijoint exercises require greater stabilization of the
body compared to single-joint exercises. In contrast, single-joint
exercises allow for a greater focus on individual muscles. The use of
single-joint exercises can be used to selectively target any
underdeveloped musculature and can enhance muscular symmetry. Ordering
resistance exercises in this specific way may result in greater strength
improvements.]{.mark}

**Exercise order**

[The arrangement of exercise order both describes the way in which
exercises are performed during the workout and is influenced by factors
including the potential goals of the client, the fatigue response of the
exercise, and the specific types of exercise, such as multijoint or
single-joint. The main method of exercise order is to first arrange them
in order of priority. Specifically, the client will first perform the
exercises that emphasize their specific goals in the workout and then
implement the less specific goals toward the end of the training
session. Reducing the element of fatigue is the primary justification
for placing the priority exercise first. The other method of exercise
order is according to the type of exercise: multijoint or single-joint.
Multijoint, also known as compound exercises, involves engagement of
large muscle mass that involves two or more primary joints.
Single-joint, also known as an assistance exercise, typically recruits
smaller muscle mass and the use of single-joint exercises (e.g., bicep
curls or triceps extensions). The fitness professional should have the
ability to choose from a multitude of exercises, for both multijoint and
single-joint exercises.]{.mark}

[This exact organization of exercise order allows the client to perform
compound exercises under low fatigue while also maximizing excellent
technique. Therefore, the fitness professional should be able to
optimize the training loads and tolerance levels for all clients by
arranging them in an ideal way to best reduce fatigue.]{.mark}

**Resistance training systems**

[Originally, most resistance training programs were designed by
powerlifters, Olympic weightlifters, and bodybuilders. Many of these
styles of resistance training programs remain popular today because of
good marketing or "gym science," not because they have been proven to be
scientifically superior to other forms of training programs that bring
about increases in stabilization, strength, and power. Research has
shown that following a systematic, integrated training program and
manipulating key training variables can help clients achieve optimal
gains in muscular endurance, strength, hypertrophy, and
performance.]{.mark}

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Type]{.mark}**   **[Definition]{.mark}**
  ------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------
  [Warm-up            [1--2 sets at a low intensity to psychologically and
  set]{.mark}         physiologically prepare for the resistance training
                      exercise]{.mark}

  [Single set]{.mark} [Performing one set of each exercise]{.mark}

  [Multiple           [Performing a multiple number of sets for each
  set]{.mark}         exercise]{.mark}

  [Pyramid]{.mark}    [Increasing (or decreasing) weight with each set]{.mark}

  [Superset]{.mark}   [Performing two exercises in rapid succession with
                      minimal rest]{.mark}

  [Complex            [Performing a multijoint or compound exercise, with a
  training]{.mark}    heavy load, immediately followed by an explosive movement
                      (e.g., a barbell squat then a vertical jump)]{.mark}

  [Drop set]{.mark}   [Performing a set to failure, then removing a small
                      percentage of the load and continuing with the
                      set]{.mark}

  [Giant set]{.mark}  [Performing four or more exercises in rotation with as
                      little rest as possible between sets]{.mark}

  [Rest pause]{.mark} [Incorporating a slight pause between repetitions within
                      a series of sets]{.mark}

  [Circuit            [Performing a series of exercises, one after the other,
  training]{.mark}    with minimal rest]{.mark}

  [Peripheral heart   [A variation of circuit training that alternates upper
  action]{.mark}      and lower body exercises throughout the set]{.mark}

  [Split              [A resistance training routine that trains different body
  routine]{.mark}     parts on separate days]{.mark}

  [Vertical           [A form of training in which strength training exercises
  loading]{.mark}     are performed in rapid succession, starting with the
                      upper body and working down to the lower body (i.e.,
                      total-body → chest → back → shoulders → biceps → triceps
                      → legs)]{.mark}

  [Horizontal         [Performing all sets of an exercise (or body part) before
  loading]{.mark}     moving on to the next exercise (or body part)]{.mark}
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Warm-up set]{.underline}

[The fitness professional should regularly perform preparatory movements
with their clients, prior to undergoing vigorous exercise, which
includes resistance training. Warm-up sets require performing one to two
sets at a low intensity prior to increasing the load. The purpose of a
warm-up set is to psychologically and physiologically prepare the
individual for the work to be performed. For example, a client may
perform one or two sets of a bench press exercise using light weights
prior to increasing the load and finishing the remainder of their set;
typically, 10 to 15 repetitions are enough for a warm-up set. It is
important that the load selected during a warm-up set does not cause
undue fatigue and compromise a client's performance for their remaining
sets.]{.mark}

[The Single-Set System]{.underline}

[As the name suggests, the single-set system uses one set per exercise.
It is usually recommended that single-set workouts be performed two
times per week to promote sufficient development and maintenance of
muscle mass. Although multiple-set training is promoted as being more
beneficial for strength and hypertrophy gains in advanced clients, the
single-set system can be beneficial, especially for beginning-level
clients.]{.mark}

[Fitness professionals are encouraged to explore the benefits and
options of single-set workouts to further customize individual program
design options. Single-set training systems are often negatively
perceived for not providing enough stimuli for adaptation. However, when
reviewing the physiology of the human body and how it operates, this
notion may not be true. In fact, many beginning clients could follow a
single-set program to allow for proper adaptive responses of the
connective tissue and nervous system before engaging in more rigorous
training systems. By encouraging clients to avoid lifting more than they
can handle, injury can be avoided.]{.mark}

[The Multiple-Set System]{.underline}

[The multiple-set system, on the other hand, consists of performing
multiple numbers of sets for each exercise. The resistance (load), sets,
and repetitions performed are selected according to the goals and needs
of the client. While multiple-set training can be appropriate for both
novice and advanced clients, it has been shown to be superior to
single-set training for more advanced clients. The increased volume
(sets, reps, and intensity) is necessary for further improvement but
must be administered appropriately to avoid overtraining.]{.mark}

[The Pyramid System]{.underline}

[The pyramid system involves a progressive or regressive step approach
that either increases weight with each set or decreases weight with each
set. In the light to heavy system, the individual typically performs 10
to 12 repetitions with a light load and increases the load for each
following set, until the individual can perform 1 or 2 repetitions,
usually in four to six sets. This system can also be used for workouts
that involve only two to four sets or higher repetition schemes of 12 to
20 repetitions. The heavy to light system works in the opposite
direction, in which the individual warms up and then begins with a heavy
load for 1 to 2 repetitions, then decreases the load and increases the
repetitions for four to six sets.]{.mark}

[The Superset System]{.underline}

[The superset system uses two exercises performed in rapid succession,
one after another. There are multiple variations of the superset
system.]{.mark}

[The first variation includes performing two exercises for the same
muscle group back to back. For example, an individual may perform the
bench press exercise, immediately followed by push-ups, to fatigue the
chest musculature. Completing two exercises in this manner will improve
muscular endurance and hypertrophy because the volume of work performed
is relatively high. This style of superset can use two, three (termed a
*triset*), or more (termed a *giant set*) exercises for the target
muscle group. The greater the number of exercises used, the greater the
degree of fatigue experienced and demands on muscular endurance.]{.mark}

[The second variation consists of performing two exercises back to back
that involve opposing muscle groups, such as the chest and back or
quadriceps and hamstring complex. Performing supersets in this manner
allows a significant load to be placed on the target muscle during each
set. This is possible because while the agonist (prime mover) is
working, the antagonist is recovering, and vice versa.]{.mark}

[Supersetting typically involves sets of 8 to 12 repetitions with no
rest between sets or exercises; however, any number of repetitions can
be used. The superset system is popular among bodybuilders and athletes
and may be beneficial for muscular endurance, muscular hypertrophy, or
power, depending on the exercises used.]{.mark}

[Complex training]{.underline}

[Complex training is an effective, time-efficient training method for
enhancing strength and power, which alternates heavy resistance exercise
with an explosive power exercise that is biomechanically similar in
movement. This provides the fitness professional an opportunity to train
both sides of the force-velocity equation in one session. Specifically,
the fitness professional can train their client on both the force end
with heavy loads (e.g., squats) coupled with a higher-velocity movement
(e.g., squat jumps). The premise behind complex training is that the
client or athlete can perform the power or plyometric exercise more
explosively due to the previous heavy-load exercise.]{.mark}

[The explanation for this phenomenon is known as post-activation
potentiation (PAP) and is the primary method on which complex training
is based. Post-activation potentiation refers to the condition by which
acute muscle-force generation is increased as a result of the inner
contractions of the muscle. In other words, a person displays an
increase in muscular force that is caused by the excitation of the
nervous system, which was created by the heavy loads.]{.mark}

[Complex training is volume dependent, meaning that it is necessary to
complete sufficient sets to stimulate the neuromuscular system (e.g.,
three to five sets or more). Due to the high-stress nature of complex
training, the neuromuscular system needs about 72 hours for complete
recovery. Considering this, Certified Personal Trainers should consider
limiting the implementation of complex training to two to four sessions
per week, depending on their client's training split.]{.mark}

[Drop sets]{.underline}

[A drop set is a resistance training system that is popular among
bodybuilders and strength athletes. It is a system that enables an
individual to continue a set past the point at which it would usually
terminate. Drop sets involve performing a set to failure, then removing
a small percentage of the load (typically 5--20%) and continuing with
the set, completing a small number of repetitions (usually 2--4). This
procedure can be repeated several times (typically 2--3 drops per set).
A set to failure followed by three successive load decrements performed
with no rest would be referred to as a triple drop. Drop sets are
considered an advanced form of resistance training suitable for
experienced lifters.]{.mark}

[Giant set]{.underline}

[Giant sets, while very similar to supersets, are comprised of four or
more exercises completed in succession. When performing giant sets, it
is best for the Certified Personal Trainer to focus on one muscle group
at a time, with three or more exercises corresponding to 8 to 12
repetitions. The rest interval is fairly short with approximately 5 to
15 seconds between exercises and several minutes (e.g., 2--5) between
giant sets. It is important to note that the fitness professional might
not be working the muscle in the exact same manner, variation, or angle;
therefore, it is best to choose a weight that is challenging while
allowing the individual to complete the necessary repetitions. For
example, a chest giant set might consist of 10 repetitions of flat
dumbbell chest presses, 10 repetitions of incline dumbbell presses, 10
repetitions of decline bench presses, and 10 repetitions of dumbbell pec
flys. The Certified Personal Trainer should customize the giant set to
their client's goals and ability level. Giant sets have been shown to
improve the weight lifted during one-rep maximum, peak, and shuttle-run
performances, as well as improve lean muscle mass.]{.mark}

[Rest-pause set]{.underline}

[Rest-pause training is a popular style that typically employs moderate
to heavy loading with a short rest interval, allowing clients to develop
as much of a stimulus as possible in minimal time. Rest-pause is a
productive method of training to increase time under tension and
metabolic stress, especially in recreationally trained persons (Prestes
et al., 2019). To perform a rest-pause set, the fitness professional
would instruct their client to engage in the following sequence:]{.mark}

1.  [Perform a set for a specific amount of repetitions.]{.mark}

2.  [Set the weight down and take several deep breaths, then complete
    the subsequent repetitions to muscular failure.]{.mark}

3.  [Complete the second step as many times as possible.]{.mark}

[The amount of rest and load used during each set is dependent on the
client's goals and fitness level. Heavier loads and slightly longer rest
periods are recommended for clients seeking maximal strength, whereas
moderate loads and shorter rest periods are ideal for clients seeking
muscular endurance or body composition changes.]{.mark}

[The circuit-training system]{.underline}

[The circuit-training system consists of a series of exercises that an
individual performs one after the other, with minimal rest between each
exercise. The typical training variables for a circuit-training program
include a low to moderate number of sets (1--3), with moderate to high
repetitions (8--20) and minimal rest periods between exercises; however,
these variables can be manipulated to enhance the desired effect.
Circuit training is a great training system for individuals with limited
time and for those who want to alter body composition.]{.mark}

[The peripheral heart action system]{.underline}

[The peripheral heart action system is another variation of circuit
training that alternates upper body and lower body exercises throughout
the circuit. This system of training distributes blood flow between the
upper and lower extremities, potentially improving circulation. The
number of exercises per sequence varies with the program's goal. The
individual typically performs 8 to 20 repetitions per exercise,
depending on their desired adaptation and fitness level. This system is
very beneficial for incorporating an integrated, multidimensional
program and for altering body composition and improving health
outcomes.]{.mark}

  ------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Resistance Training Exercises]{.mark}**
  ------------------------------------------------------------------
  [Dumbbell chest press]{.mark}

  [Dumbbell squat]{.mark}

  [Seated machine row]{.mark}

  [Dumbbell Romanian deadlift]{.mark}

  [Standing dumbbell shoulder press]{.mark}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------

[The Split-Routine System]{.underline}

[A split-routine system involves breaking up the body into parts to be
trained on separate days. Many bodybuilders and mass-dominant and
strength athletes (American football, shot put, etc.) use the
split-routine system. Bodybuilders typically perform numerous exercises
on the same day for the same body part to bring about optimal muscular
hypertrophy. By breaking up the body into parts that can be trained on
different days, more work can be performed for the allotted time per
workout, which can increase muscular hypertrophy Any variation of these
outlined routines can be used, but the important issue in some of these
routines is recovery time. When training each body part more than once
per week, fitness professionals should account for volume and
intensity.]{.mark}

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Routine]{.mark}**   **[Day(s)                   **[Body Parts
                         Performed]{.mark}**         Trained]{.mark}**
  ---------------------- --------------------------- ---------------------------
  [2-day]{.mark}         [Monday]{.mark}             [Upper body]{.mark}

                         [Thursday]{.mark}           [Lower body]{.mark}

  [3-day]{.mark}         [Monday]{.mark}             [Chest, shoulders,
                                                     triceps]{.mark}

                         [Wednesday]{.mark}          [Legs]{.mark}

                         [Friday]{.mark}             [Back, biceps]{.mark}

  [4-day]{.mark}         [Monday]{.mark}             [Chest, triceps]{.mark}

                         [Tuesday]{.mark}            [Back, biceps]{.mark}

                         [Thursday]{.mark}           [Legs]{.mark}

                         [Friday]{.mark}             [Shoulders]{.mark}

  [5-day]{.mark}         [Monday]{.mark}             [Chest]{.mark}

                         [Tuesday]{.mark}            [Legs]{.mark}

                         [Wednesday]{.mark}          [Back]{.mark}

                         [Thursday]{.mark}           [Shoulders]{.mark}

                         [Friday]{.mark}             [Arms]{.mark}

  [6-day]{.mark}         [Monday and Friday]{.mark}  [Chest, shoulders,
                                                     triceps]{.mark}

                         [Tuesday and                [Legs]{.mark}
                         Saturday]{.mark}            

                         [Wednesday and              [Back, biceps]{.mark}
                         Sunday]{.mark}              
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Vertical Loading and Horizontal Loading**

[Vertical loading is a resistance training system that moves a workout
vertically down the workout template by alternating body parts trained
from set to set (Table 20-8). It is a form of training in which
strength-training exercises are performed in rapid succession, starting
with the upper body and working down to the lower body:]{.mark}

1.  [Total-body]{.mark}

2.  [Chest]{.mark}

3.  [Back]{.mark}

4.  [Shoulders]{.mark}

5.  [Biceps Triceps]{.mark}

6.  [Legs]{.mark}

[In a vertically loaded workout, the client would perform the first
exercise (total-body) for the required repetitions and then move on to
the chest exercise for the next set of repetitions. After the chest
exercise, the client would move on to the back exercise and so forth,
until all exercises have been completed. Once completed, the client
would return to the first total-body exercise and run through the
exercises again for the desired amount of sets. This can also be done in
a circuit style, by minimizing the rest periods between
exercises.]{.mark}

[This vertical loading system of training can be very beneficial for
allowing maximal recovery to each body part while minimizing the amount
of time wasted on rest. For example, if it takes 1 minute to perform
each exercise, by the time the client returns to the chest exercise, 7
to 10 minutes could have passed, which should be sufficient time to
allow for adequate recovery. Even though 7 to 10 minutes have passed,
the client has been constantly moving and has performed one set of every
exercise in their workout.]{.mark}

[Horizontal loading refers to performing all sets of an exercise or body
part before moving on to the next exercise or body part. For example, if
performing three sets of a chest exercise and three sets of a back
exercise, the client would perform all three sets of the chest exercise
before moving to the back exercise. The progression of exercises is
therefore said to be horizontal across the template. This is the method
most commonly used in health club environments and is appropriate for
hypertrophy, maximal strength, and power training.]{.mark}

[The drawback to the horizontal loading system is the amount of time
typically spent resting, which can often be more time than the actual
workout itself. Horizontal loading can be a metabolic progression if
rest periods are monitored and limited to 30 to 90 seconds between sets.
If the same muscle groups are forced to work with minimal recovery, it
can lead to faster development of metabolic and hypertrophy-related
adaptations in the muscle.]{.mark}

**Safety**

[The most important objective and goal for the Certified Personal
Trainer is to commit to doing no harm to their clients. Like all
athletic activities, the susceptibility to injury is always present.
However, the fitness professional should use all measures of risk
management to keep injury risk to a minimum while maximizing client
results. When the Certified Personal Trainer increases knowledge through
science and application, awareness is enhanced and the risk of client
injury due to poor judgment and negligence is decreased.]{.mark}

[Maintaining a safe environment]{.underline}

[The fitness professional's scope of practice involves the
responsibility of interviewing potential clients to gather relevant
information regarding their personal health history, lifestyle, and
willingness and ability to exercise. Much of their centred care is
concentrated on instructing, demonstrating, teaching, evaluating, and
providing extensive education to their clients. The Certified Personal
Trainer must effectively create and endorse the use of safe and
efficient exercise programming through appropriate client consultation,
screening, and comprehensive evaluation. Certified Personal Trainers
should also be able to respond appropriately in emergency situations if
and when they arise.]{.mark}

[Proper equipment setup]{.underline}

[Equipment should be grouped and placed according to specific
categories, including free weights, resistance training machines,
plyometrics, and warm-up areas. Proper setup ensures adequate flow
throughout the gym and weight room, reducing congestion and maximizing
the use of space. Fitness professionals should be cognizant of the
specific equipment used during their sessions and return all equipment
to its original place. This helps maintain the condition of equipment
and potentially reduces the risk of injury because unkempt or untidy
equipment can become a tripping hazard. Fitness professionals should
never use damaged equipment in the facility, such as frayed cables and
missing or unstable pieces. All equipment should be repaired or replaced
if broken. Current and existing equipment should be regularly cleaned
and upgraded over time.]{.mark}

[Spotting techniques]{.underline}

[The Certified Personal Trainer must teach and model proper technique
during exercise, perform proper spotting, and monitor all exercise
movements until safe execution has been mastered. It is critical for
fitness professionals to exhibit large degrees of confidence and
experience with respect to spotting technique to provide maximum safety
and high-quality coaching for every session. Compound exercises, such as
a barbell back squat, bench press, or dumbbell shoulder press, require a
spotter to reduce injury risk, especially when using heavier loads.
Research has indicated that a decrease in injuries occurs through proper
spotting techniques.]{.mark}

[The following checklist should be used by the fitness professional
during spotting activities:]{.mark}

1.  [The spotter should regulate the number of total repetitions
    performed by the client prior to the beginning of each set.]{.mark}

2.  [The spotter should stand and maintain a stable, wide-stance body
    position to increase maximal safety of the corresponding
    exercise.]{.mark}

3.  [An experienced spotter delivers adequate and ample support for the
    client to successfully execute the lift, especially when lifting
    through the sticking point.]{.mark}

4.  [The Certified Personal Trainer is encouraged to spot at the
    client's wrists instead of the elbows when using dumbbells (i.e., in
    a dumbbell shoulder press). Spotting at the wrist provides better
    support for the lifter and eliminates the elbows collapsing
    inward.]{.mark}

5.  [During the barbell squat exercise, the spotter should be positioned
    behind the lifter and place their upper arms underneath the lifter's
    armpits. This provides maximum spotting security between the spotter
    and the lifter.]{.mark}

6.  [The Certified Personal Trainer is encouraged to use an additional
    spotter for exercises when the load surpasses what a single spotter
    can successfully manage on their own. For example, two spotters will
    stand on opposite sides of the barbell during a heavy barbell back
    squat exercise. When and if needed, the spotters will assist the
    client in accomplishing the movements by lifting the ends of the
    barbell until they are able to complete the exercise.]{.mark}

7.  [It is not recommended for fitness professionals to spot
    machine-based or cable-based exercises by placing their hands
    underneath the weight stack. This increases risk of injury to the
    spotter and the lifter.]{.mark}

[Monitoring exercise]{.underline}

[Fitness professionals should closely monitor their clients during an
exercise session, including monitoring exercise intensity and exercise
technique. Monitoring exercise intensity can be performed in many
fashions, such as tracking heart rate or ratings of perceived exertion,
which is a subjective ratings scale from 1 to 10 in which clients
subjectively rate their level of effort during exercise based on
physical markers, such as breathlessness, fatigue, sweat rate, and
muscle soreness. A lower score indicates light effort, whereas scores
closer to 10 indicate intense effort.]{.mark}

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Rating]{.mark}**   **[Perceived Exertion Level]{.mark}**
  --------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
  [0]{.mark}            [No exertion, at rest]{.mark}

  [1]{.mark}            [Very light]{.mark}

  [2--3]{.mark}         [Light]{.mark}

  [4--5]{.mark}         [Moderate, somewhat hard]{.mark}

  [6--7]{.mark}         [High, vigorous]{.mark}

  [8--9]{.mark}         [Very hard]{.mark}

  [10]{.mark}           [Maximum effort, highest possible]{.mark}
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Five kinetic chain checkpoints**

[In addition to tracking exercise intensity, fitness professionals must
be proficient at teaching and correcting proper exercise technique. In
other words, fitness professionals must be diligent and meticulous when
monitoring their client's movements and provide the appropriate
corrections and cueing to ensure that their clients perform exercises
correctly. This minimizes injury risk and maximizes muscle recruitment.
As with all exercises, quality should always come before quantity or
weight progression, and the five kinetic chain checkpoints should always
be monitored.]{.mark}

1.  [Feet: Approximately shoulder-width apart and pointing straight
    ahead (unless the exercise requires a different foot
    position)]{.mark}

2.  [Knees: In line with the second and third toes (avoid allowing knees
    to cave inward)]{.mark}

3.  [Hips: Level and in a neutral position]{.mark}

4.  [Shoulders: In a neutral position (avoid protracting or elevating
    the shoulders, unless the exercise requires these positions)]{.mark}

5.  [Head: Cervical spine in a neutral position]{.mark}

**Proper breathing technique**

[Although breathing is regulated and coordinated by the autonomic
nervous system, proper breathing is not automatic. Breathing influences
muscular function and posture because the habitual use of breathing
muscles during respiration affects the ways in which these muscles are
used.]{.mark}

[Especially during resistance training, fitness professionals need to
teach their clients proper breathing techniques to maximize performance
and minimize injury risk. During the concentric phase of an exercise,
the client should breathe out (exhalation), preferably through the
mouth, whereas during the eccentric portion of the lift, the client
should breathe in (inhalation).]{.mark}

[When discussing breathing technique, the Valsalva manoeuvre can be a
useful strategy, particularly when performing maximal or near-maximal
lifts to ensure spinal stability. This process involves expiring against
a closed glottis, creating additional intra-abdominal pressure and
spinal stability. In turn, this reduces the associative compressive
forces on the spinal discs during lifting. Keeping the spine stable
requires individuals to brace the trunk, using many abdominal muscles,
including the transverse abdominis, rectus abdominis, the external and
internal obliques, and the diaphragm, thus generating large amounts of
intra-abdominal pressure, which is critically important when lifting
heavy loads.]{.mark}

[However, the Valsalva manoeuvre is also potentially dangerous because
it can cause light-headedness and dizziness, impede the return of venous
blood to the heart, and raise an individual's heart rate and blood
pressure. Using the Valsalva manoeuvre is generally not recommended for
clients presenting with hypertension and other forms of heart disease.
Considering that a large majority of fitness clients are seeking weight
loss and improved health measures as opposed to maximal strength, the
use of the Valsalva manoeuvre in many cases is not necessary, unless the
client is physically healthy and seeking maximal performance measures in
strength.]{.mark}

**Guidelines for resistance training**

[Resistance exercises are an integral component of any exercise training
program because they help ensure optimal joint stability, muscular
endurance, strength, power, and coordinated movement. Moreover,
resistance exercises can be an effective mode meant for increasing lean
muscle mass, reducing body fat, enhancing athletic performance, and
improving numerous health markers. Programming resistance training
exercises must be systematic and progressive. As such, fitness
professionals should follow specific program guidelines, including
proper exercise selection criteria and milestones for
progression.]{.mark}

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **[Resistance Training Variables]{.mark}**                          |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| [Progressive]{.mark}             | [Volume]{.mark}                  |
|                                  |                                  |
| - [Easy to hard]{.mark}          | - [Sets]{.mark}                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|   [Simple to complex]{.mark}     |   - [Low]{.mark}                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|   [Static to dynamic]{.mark}     |     [Moderate]{.mark}            |
|                                  |                                  |
|   [Slow to fast]{.mark}          |     [High]{.mark}                |
|                                  |                                  |
|   [Stabilization → strength →    |   [Repetitions]{.mark}           |
|   power]{.mark}                  |                                  |
|                                  |   - [Low]{.mark}                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |     [Moderate]{.mark}            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |     [High]{.mark}                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| [Range of motion]{.mark}         | [Planes of motion]{.mark}        |
|                                  |                                  |
| - [Full]{.mark}                  | - [Sagittal]{.mark}              |
|                                  |                                  |
|   [Partial]{.mark}               |   [Frontal]{.mark}               |
|                                  |                                  |
|   [End range]{.mark}             |   [Transverse]{.mark}            |
|                                  |                                  |
|   [Mixed ranges]{.mark}          |   [Multiplanar]{.mark}           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| [Speed of motion]{.mark}         | [Resistance]{.mark}              |
|                                  |                                  |
| - [Slow]{.mark}                  | - [Body weight]{.mark}           |
|                                  |                                  |
|   [Medium]{.mark}                |   [Light]{.mark}                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|   [Fast]{.mark}                  |   [Medium]{.mark}                |
|                                  |                                  |
|   [Explosive]{.mark}             |   [Heavy]{.mark}                 |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

**Resistance training progressions**

[When introducing resistance exercises into an exercise program, the
exercises should initially focus on optimizing ideal movement patterns.
These patterns include (but are not limited to) squatting, pushing,
pulling, vertical pressing, and hip hinging. Clients should become
familiar with these basic movement patterns before a fitness
professional introduces intricate or advanced forms of exercise. In
addition, a focus on acquiring basic exercise skills, such as the proper
use of exercise machines, free weights, and other types of exercise
equipment, is paramount. This is especially important to minimize injury
risk for new or deconditioned clients.]{.mark}

[Once a client displays adequate movement competency, resistance
exercises can progress. We recommend progressing resistance training in
a systematic fashion, using these three steps: (1) stabilization-focused
exercises, (2) strength-focused exercises, and (3) power-focused
exercises. The sequence is critically important.]{.mark}

[Stabilization-focused exercises]{.underline}

[First, clients should focus on the adaptations of stability and
muscular endurance. This provides an adequate foundation of core and
joint stability and prepares connective tissue (tendons, ligaments) for
higher demands of training. In addition, the client will obtain greater
levels of muscular endurance and strengthen type 1 muscle fibers
necessary for maintaining ideal posture and spine stability, especially
during more advanced forms of exercises that use heavier loads. This
form of resistance training should provide greater demands on core
stability and proprioception by progressing from bilateral to unilateral
movements, using slow repetition tempos and high repetition schemes. For
example, the standing cable row can be progressed from two-arm movements
to alternating-arm movements to one-arm movements, providing greater
variety in one exercise]{.mark}.

[Exercises can also be progressed in this category by decreasing one's
base of support. For example, the same cable row sequence (two-arm,
alternating-arm, one-arm) can be advanced to a single-leg stance to
further challenge the client's posture, balance, and joint
stability.]{.mark}

[Lastly, stabilization-focused resistance exercises can be progressed to
increase stabilization demands of the upper extremities by using unique
loading patterns and specialized equipment. For example, the kettlebell
bottoms-up exercise is a unique loading pattern that challenges both
core and shoulder stability, whereas the Earthquake Bar is a unique tool
that simultaneously challenges upper-extremity stability and
strength.]{.mark}

[CRITICAL]{.mark}

[Stabilization-focused resistance exercises should use a slow repetition
tempo, a high amount of repetitions (typically 12--20), and a few sets
(1--3). This form of training enhances muscular endurance, posture, and
joint stability.]{.mark}

[However, exercises must be tailored to the client's own ability level.
For example, a highly skilled athlete may be able to perform advanced
forms of stability training, such as performing lifts on a single leg,
or use unique loading schemes seen with implements like an Earthquake
Bar or kettlebell.]{.mark}

[Conversely, an older adult unaccustomed to exercise will likely need to
start with less advanced forms of stability training. In this instance,
the use of elastic bands in a seated position may be the most unstable
position that this client can safely handle. Over time, with practice
and improved conditioning, the older adult can graduate toward more
advanced forms of stability training.]{.mark}

[Strength-focused exercises]{.underline}

[After clients have obtained sufficient movement competency, stability,
and muscular endurance, it is safe to progress toward strength-focused
resistance exercises. These exercises focus on the adaptations of
strength and muscular hypertrophy and typically require heavier loads
than stabilization-focused resistance exercises. The goal is to increase
the amount of stress placed on the body for increased muscle size and
strength. This period of training is a necessary progression from
stabilization for anyone who desires to increase muscle size, muscle
strength, and bone mineral density. Common exercises in this category
include squats, Romanian deadlifts, bench presses, and other common
weightlifting exercises.]{.mark}

[Power-focused exercises]{.underline}

[The last progression focuses on the adaptation of muscular power.
Power-focused resistance exercises are designed to increase the rate of
force production (or speed of muscle contraction). This form of training
uses the adaptations of stabilization and strength acquired previously
and applies them with more realistic speeds and forces that the body
will encounter in everyday life and in sports.]{.mark}

[Power training is not a common or usual practice in the fitness
environment, but it has a very viable and purposeful place in a properly
planned training program. Examples of power-focused resistance exercise
can include (but are not limited to) explosive movements, such as
medicine ball throws and explosive plyometrics.]{.mark}

**Resistance training exercises**

[The following is a list of common stabilization-focused,
strength-focused, and power-focused resistance training exercises.
However, this is not an exhaustive list.]{.mark}

[Total-Body Exercise Descriptions]{.underline}

Ball Squat, Curl to Press

[When performing any form of a ball squat, try to use the ball to guide
one through the squatting motion (sitting in a chair) versus relying on
the ball for support (leaning back on the ball).]{.mark}

Multiplanar Step-Up, Balance, Curl to Overhead Press

[When pressing overhead, make sure the low-back does not arch. This may
indicate overactivity of the latissimus dorsi and underactivity of the
abdominals.]{.mark}

Single-Leg Squat, Curl to Overhead Press

[When performing any version of a single-leg squat, only squat to the
depth that can be safely controlled while maintaining ideal
posture.]{.mark}

Single-Leg Squat to Row

[This total-body exercise targets many muscles of the posterior chain,
including the gluteus maximus and shoulder retractors, such as the
posterior deltoids and rhomboids.]{.mark}

Multiplanar Lunge to Two-Arm Dumbbell Press

[When performing any squatting or lunging motion, keep the foot straight
and align the knees with the second and third toes. This ensures proper
joint mechanics and optimal force generation, increasing the benefit of
the exercise while decreasing its risk.]{.mark}

Squat, Curl to Two-Arm Press

[Choose a load that enables the client to perform the biceps curl and
overhead press with ideal form. The upper body will likely fatigue
before the lower body when performing this exercise.]{.mark}

Deadlift, Shrug to Calf Raise

[This exercise can typically be done using heavy loads; it is a
complementary exercise for those who perform Olympic
weightlifting.]{.mark}

Two-Arm Push Press

[This is a power-focused resistance exercise. Clients are encouraged to
first establish proper movement patterns, stability, and strength before
attempting this exercise.]{.mark}

Barbell Clean

[This is a simplified illustration of performing the barbell clean. This
is an advanced power exercise that requires proper instruction before
attempting.]{.mark}

[The following is a list of common stabilization-focused,
strength-focused, and power-focused resistance training exercises.
However, this is not an exhaustive list.]{.mark}

[Chest / Pushing Exercise Descriptions]{.underline}

Push-Up

[A common compensation that occurs when performing a push-up is arching
of the low-back as the hips fall toward the ground. This is an indicator
that the individual possesses underactive abdominals and the exercise
must be regressed.]{.mark}

Push-Up: Hands on Ball

[If using a stability ball is too advanced, regress the exercise to a
traditional floor push-up.]{.mark}

Standing Cable Chest Press

[The shoulder shrug is a common compensation that occurs when performing
a standing cable chest press. This can indicate overactive upper
trapezius muscles, which would require additional stretching.]{.mark}

Flat Dumbbell Chest Press

[When performing chest presses, the range of motion at the shoulder
joint, which is indicated by how far the elbows go down, will be
determined by the load one is lifting (control) and tissue
extensibility. The key is only to go as far as one can control without
compensating.]{.mark}

Barbell Bench Press

[During this exercise, the feet should remain in contact with the floor,
whereas the buttocks, shoulders, and head must remain in contact with
the bench. The use of weight plates underneath the feet is acceptable if
the client cannot reach the floor, due to height limitations.]{.mark}

Medicine Ball Chest Pass

[If the ability to perform power exercises with a medicine ball is not
an option, because of equipment or facility limitations, this exercise
can also be done using tubing or a cable apparatus. Make sure to adjust
the weight or resistance accordingly, so the client can still perform
the movement quickly and under control without compensation.]{.mark}

Medicine Ball Rotation Chest Pass

[A client can either throw the ball to their Certified Personal Trainer
or toward a wall. If throwing toward a wall, instruct the client to be
prepared to catch the ball on the rebound.]{.mark}

[The following is a list of common stabilization-focused,
strength-focused, and power-focused resistance training exercises.
However, this is not an exhaustive list.]{.mark}

[Back/Pulling Exercise Descriptions]{.underline}

Ball Cobra

[Externally rotate the arms during this exercise so the thumbs are
pointing up toward the sky.]{.mark}

Ball Dumbbell Row

[Performing exercises in a prone position can be uncomfortable. When
working with overweight individuals, it may be more appropriate to
perform this exercise using a machine or from a standing, hip-hinged
position.]{.mark}

Standing Cable Row

[When performing rows, initiate the movement by retracting and
depressing the shoulder blades (scapulae). Do not allow the shoulders to
elevate.]{.mark}

Seated Cable Row

[To increase the effectiveness of the exercise and decrease the risk of
injury, keep the torso stationary throughout the execution of the
exercise. Flexing and extending the torso while performing the row
creates momentum, which decreases the effectiveness of the exercise and
may place stress on the low-back.]{.mark}

Seated Lat Pulldown

[Performing lat pulldowns with a bar behind the neck is not advised,
because this places stress on the shoulder joints and cervical spine. If
performing the lat pulldown exercise with a bar, the bar should pass in
front of the face, to approximately shoulder height.]{.mark}

Medicine Ball Pullover Throw

[To decrease stress to the shoulder and low-back, it will be important
for the client to have optimal extensibility through the latissimus
dorsi musculature before performing this exercise.]{.mark}

Soccer Throw

[Use a medicine ball that is no more than 10% body weight. The goal is
to throw the ball as hard as possible to maximize power
production.]{.mark}

[The following is a list of common stabilization-focused,
strength-focused, and power-focused resistance training exercises.
However, this is not an exhaustive list.]{.mark}

[Shoulder / Vertical Pressing Exercise Descriptions]{.underline}

Tubing External Rotation

[This exercise helps strengthen muscles of the rotator cuff, such as the
infraspinatus and teres minor. These two muscles externally rotate the
shoulder.]{.mark}

Tubing Internal Rotation

[This exercise helps strengthen the subscapularis, one of the four
rotator cuff muscles. This muscle internally rotates the
shoulder.]{.mark}

Single-Leg Dumbbell Scaption

[Performing shoulder exercises in the scapular plane, with arms out at a
45-degree angle, decreases the risk of the supraspinatus muscle becoming
impinged within the shoulder. If standing on one leg is too difficult,
regress this exercise to a bilateral stance.]{.mark}

Ball Combo I

[This exercise consists of three parts. First, the client will perform a
Y (scaption) position, then a T (shoulder abduction) position, and
lastly an A (cobra) position.]{.mark}

Ball Combo II

[Like ball combo I, this exercise also consists of three parts: a
dumbbell row, shoulder external rotation, and a prone shoulder
press.]{.mark}

Standing Dumbbell Shoulder Press

[Proper core activation is important during all overhead pressing
exercises, so as to minimize injury to the low-back area.]{.mark}

Standing Dumbbell Lateral Raise

[This exercise helps strengthen the middle deltoid. Remember, the
deltoids consist of three segments: anterior deltoid, middle deltoid,
and posterior deltoid.]{.mark}

Seated Dumbbell Shoulder Press

[When performing overhead presses, make sure the cervical spine stays
neutral, so the head is drawn back. Do not allow the head to migrate
forward, because this places excessive stress on the posterior neck
muscles and cervical spine.]{.mark}

Seated Shoulder Press Machine

[Ensure that the client is properly positioned on the machine with their
feet flat on the floor.]{.mark}

Front Medicine Ball Oblique Throw

[If a partner is unavailable, this exercise can be performed by tossing
the medicine ball against a wall.]{.mark}

Overhead Medicine Ball Throw

[This exercise is best performed outside to avoid hitting overhead
lights or the ceiling.]{.mark}

[The following is a list of common stabilization-focused,
strength-focused, and power-focused resistance training exercises.
However, this is not an exhaustive list.]{.mark}

[Biceps Exercise Descriptions]{.underline}

Single-Leg Dumbbell Curl

[Keeping the scapulae retracted during the exercise ensures proper
scapular stability, placing more of an emphasis on the bicep's
musculature.]{.mark}

Standing Dumbbell Curl

[This exercise is performed in the same manner as the single-leg
dumbbell curl. Instruct your clients to avoid using momentum to curl the
weight upwards.]{.mark}

Standing Barbell Curl

[To decrease stress on the elbow, do not grip too close or too wide on
the bar. To determine grip width, clients should extend their elbows so
their hands fall naturally to their sides, palms facing forward. This is
the position where they should be when they grip the bar.]{.mark}

Standing Hammer Curl

[Palms should face each other throughout the duration of the movement.
This exercise also strengthens forearm muscles in addition to the biceps
brachii.]{.mark}

Seated Two-Arm Dumbbell Biceps Curl

[This exercise can also be performed with either alternating arms or one
arm at a time.]{.mark}

Biceps Curl Machine

[When performing biceps curls, it is important to keep an upright
posture. Do not allow your client's torso to excessively flex or extend
to cheat the movement.]{.mark}

[The following is a list of common stabilization-focused,
strength-focused, and power-focused resistance training exercises.
However, this is not an exhaustive list.]{.mark}

[Triceps Exercise Descriptions]{.underline}

Supine Ball Dumbbell Triceps Extensions (Dumbbell Skull Crushers)

[When performing stability ball exercises in a supine position, the head
should comfortably rest on the ball. This will decrease stress to the
cervical spine.]{.mark}

Prone Ball Dumbbell Triceps Extensions

[To ensure optimal alignment, make sure the ankles, knees, hips,
shoulders, and ears are all in alignment and maintained throughout the
exercise.]{.mark}

Cable Pushdown

[Using a rope when performing cable pushdowns will allow the elbows to
track through their natural path of motion versus having the hands
closely fixed on a bar. This may help decrease the risk of elbow
pain.]{.mark}

Supine Bench Barbell Triceps Extensions (Barbell Skull Crushers)

[As with barbell curls, keeping the hands too close on the bar can
increase stress on the elbow. Placing hands closer to shoulder-width
apart can decrease stress on the elbow.]{.mark}

Close Grip Bench Press

[The proper hand position should be slightly inside shoulder-width apart
during this exercise. Moving the hands inward places more emphasis on
the triceps musculature, but the anterior shoulders and chest are still
involved with this exercise.]{.mark}

[The following is a list of common stabilization-focused,
strength-focused, and power-focused resistance training exercises.
However, this is not an exhaustive list.]{.mark}

[Leg Exercise Descriptions]{.underline}

Ball Squat

[Ball squats are a great way to teach individuals how to squat properly.
The goal is to have them eventually progress to squats without the
stability ball.]{.mark}

Single-Leg Squat

[This is an advanced stabilization-focused leg exercise. The client
should only squat as low as they can safely control.]{.mark}

Single-Leg Romanian Deadlift

[This exercise strengthens many muscles of the posterior chain including
the hamstrings, gluteal complex, and lumbar erector spinae (low-back
muscles).]{.mark}

Calf Raise

[This exercise helps strengthen the gastrocnemius, soleus, and other
plantar flexor muscles of the lower leg.]{.mark}

Multiplanar Step-Up

[Lunges are excellent lower extremity strengthening exercises; however,
many individuals lack the flexibility and stabilization requirements to
execute the exercise properly. Step-ups are a great way to regress the
lunge until your client develops proper flexibility and stabilization
capabilities to perform the lunge correctly.]{.mark}

Multiplanar Lunge

[Lunges can be performed in all directions, including front lunges,
lateral lunges, and turning lunges. Reverse lunges are also an
option.]{.mark}

Dumbbell Squat

[Make sure the feet are positioned shoulderwidth apart, the toes are
pointed straight, and the knees are aligned with the second and third
toes. Avoiding knee valgus (knees caving inward) is important to
minimize unwanted stress to the knee ligaments.]{.mark}

Leg Press (Hip Sled)

[Make sure the feet are positioned on the platform shoulder-width apart,
the toes are pointed straight, and the knees are aligned with the second
and third toes. This will decrease stress to the knees, hips, and
low-back.]{.mark}

Barbell Squat

["How far down should your client squat?" The answer is, "Only as far as
can be controlled without compensating." As your client develops more
flexibility and stabilization strength, the range of motion can be
increased, assuming no compensations occur.]{.mark}

Deadlift

[Monitor all five kinetic chain checkpoints throughout the duration of
the exercise, especially your client's spine position. The spine should
remain neutral rather than rounded and hunched over.]{.mark}

Squat Jump

[Landing with the knees caved inward is dangerous and can lead to pain
and injury. Make sure your clients display optimal landing mechanics,
with their feet pointed straight ahead and knees tracking over the
second and third toes.]{.mark}

Tuck Jump

[When performing jumping exercises, make sure your clients land just
behind the ball of their foot, rather than on the ball of the foot or on
the heel. This will ensure proper force distribution through the foot
and lower extremities, thus improving force production
capabilities]{.mark}

**Program design**

[Creating and modifying exercise programs for clients can be a
complicated process because there are many variables to consider,
including the client's goals, their tolerance for exercise, and their
unique physical abilities and medical history. Moreover, fitness
professionals have a multitude of different exercise formats to choose
from, which can potentially cause confusion and frustration during the
program design process. Keeping these concerns in mind, arguably the
most important factor when creating an exercise program is to ensure it
is adopted and adhered to by the client. Whether programs are developed
for beginning exercisers, avid fitness enthusiasts, or experienced
athletes, exercise programs need individuality and uniqueness to make
them impactful and meaningful for clients. This increases commitment and
helps affirm a client's success toward reaching their health, wellness,
and fitness goals.]{.mark}

[In addition, it is vitally important for fitness professionals to
design and implement exercise programs that are individualized for each
client based on their needs, goals, and abilities. Exercise programs
based on a client's assessment results, attitudes, and fitness level
help guarantee continued success and long-term adherence to the exercise
program.]{.mark}

[To assist in this process, fitness professionals must be able to answer
specific questions that are related to the appropriateness of exercise
programming:]{.mark}

1.  [What are my client's needs, goals, and abilities?]{.mark}

2.  [Does my client have any concerns or contraindications for exercise
    due to previous injuries or medical conditions?]{.mark}

3.  [What are the results from my client's fitness assessment? Does my
    client exhibit muscle imbalances, poor posture, or limited
    mobility?]{.mark}

4.  [Which forms of exercise does my client like and dislike? Am I
    integrating liked exercises for my client to foster a positive
    environment?]{.mark}

5.  [What exercise variables, such as sets, repetitions, or rest
    periods, should I use that best match my client's abilities, goals,
    and phase of training?]{.mark}

6.  [What exercise modalities, such as free weights, elastic bands, or
    machines, are appropriate for my client based on my client's goals
    and fitness level?]{.mark}

7.  [What is the appropriate frequency (days per week) and duration
    (time per session) of exercise sessions that should be used?]{.mark}

[If the fitness professional can answer these questions consistently, it
is likely the client is in good hands to reach their fitness goals in a
safe and effective manner. If not, the fitness professional is possibly
creating an inappropriate exercise program, which may cause injury or
undue fatigue that could lead to overtraining or burnout (Walters et
al., 2018). Conversely, by following specified protocols, risk factors
can be mitigated, and the client can exercise in a safe and positive
environment that is set up for success.]{.mark}

[Fitness programming takes practice, but, as with anything, the more
experience obtained working with a wide range of exercisers, the less
challenging it becomes. The goal is to create unique exercise programs
that are systematic and progressive so that consistent overload can
occur and fitness goals can be met.]{.mark}

[Additionally, it is recommended that the fitness professional adopt an
integrated approach to program design that includes multiple forms of
training, such as flexibility; cardiorespiratory; core; balance;
plyometric; speed, agility, and quickness (SAQ); and resistance
training. Using an integrated approach to program design can increase
consistency and progression and minimize the risk of injury.]{.mark}

[In some instances, clients and fitness professionals may be tempted to
use an overly simplistic approach to program design. For example,
exercise programs may overemphasize particular factors, such as
expending maximal calories for fat-loss goals or the development of
speed and power to improve athletic performance. However, a well-rounded
exercise program must be progressive and systematic and consider many
variables, such as teaching proper movement patterns, improving mobility
and stability of the kinetic chain, enhancing muscular and aerobic
endurance, and reducing the likelihood of injury. In other words,
exercise programming involves more than what we see at the surface, such
as reducing body fat, gaining muscle mass, or increasing strength and
power. This is known as the "iceberg effect".]{.mark}

### Program design

[Program design is an organizational structure of exercises with
appropriate volume and intensity to attain a specific fitness or
performance goal. In other words, the fitness professional provides a
road map and vital step-by-step processes, modifications, and parameters
to follow based on client capabilities, limitations, and goals. To be
successful in program design, the fitness professional must have a clear
understanding of training plans and periodization.]{.mark}

**Training plans**

[To accomplish objectives, training programs should be organized into a
plan that involves using long-term and short-term goals. A training plan
is a specific outline that a fitness professional uses to help meet the
client's goal.]{.mark}

[It determines the forms of training to be used, how long it will take,
how often it will change, and what specific exercises will be performed.
Training plans are unique to each client, and fitness professionals are
discouraged from using cookie-cutter exercise programs or plans.
Understanding the importance of designing safe and effective programs
using acute variable manipulation is essential information for all
fitness professionals to possess.]{.mark}

**Periodization fundamentals**

[Fitness and sport-performance programming are based on the concept of
periodization. Periodization (or planned fitness training) is a
systematic approach to program design that exploits the general
adaptation syndrome and principle of specificity to vary the amount and
type of stress placed on the body to produce adaptation and prevent
injury. Periodization varies the focus of a training program at
regularly planned periods of time to encourage optimal adaptation.
Periodization involves two primary objectives:]{.mark}

1.  [Dividing the training program into distinct periods (or phases) of
    training: annual training plan (macrocycle), monthly training plan
    (mesocycle), and weekly or daily training plan (microcycle)]{.mark}

2.  [Training different forms of strength in each period (or phase) to
    control training volume and to prevent injury]{.mark}

[Annual plan (macrocycle)]{.underline}

[An annual training plan, or macrocycle, shows how the training program
will progress for the long term, from month to month, to meet the
desired goal. It outlines specified training schedules, projected
fitness evaluation sessions, and planned recovery periods. In other
words, macrocycles provide a bird's-eye view of the entire year's
training regimen. This gives the client a clear representation of how
the fitness professional plans to get the client to their goal.]{.mark}

[In the realm of sports conditioning, macrocycles are typically divided
into preparatory, competitive, and transition periods (i.e., preseason,
in-season, or off-season) that are spread out over a year's
time]{.mark}.

[Monthly plan (mesocycle)]{.underline}

[A monthly training plan, or mesocycle, divides a training plan into
specified monthly cycles. The monthly plan details the specific days of
each workout and the style of training used. This enables clients to see
their training schedule on a smaller scale, and it provides more detail
than the annual plan (macrocycle).]{.mark}

[While typically 4 weeks long, it is important to note that mesocycles
do not have to be 1 month in duration in all instances. For example, a
bodybuilder may follow a 3-week fat-loss mesocycle in preparation for a
contest, whereas a baseball pitcher may use a 6-week off-season
mesocycle program to build arm strength and increase throwing
velocity.]{.mark}

[Weekly plan (microcycle)]{.underline}

[A weekly plan, or microcycle, details the specific workouts for the
week. Many clients appreciate this plan the most, but without first
developing the annual or monthly training plans, weekly plans can lack
purpose, focus, and direction. Microcycles are usually 7 days, but,
depending on the client's schedule, a microcycle could expand to 10
days, if desired.]{.mark}

[In most cases, three to six microcycles form a mesocycle, depending on
the client's training schedule and goals.]{.mark}

**Linear and Undulating Periodization**

[Periodization has been shown to be an effective method of program
design for many fitness-related goals, and yet, to date, it is not a
common practice among all fitness professionals. Periodization provides
for the repeated use of different forms of training, at specific times,
to elicit different adaptations in the body, such as muscular endurance,
strength, and power. Periodization also aims to properly manage training
more effectively, create a peak period for competition, and reduce the
risk of injury and overtraining]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[Periodization's origins stem from athletics because athletes compete
during specific times of the year. As such, strength and sport coaches
use periodization to ensure athletes reach peak performance according to
the athlete's competition schedule.]{.mark}

[Periodization can be divided into three distinct phases that lead up to
competition: preparatory, competitive, and transition. The preparatory
phase aims to gradually increase volume and intensity of training to
peak levels prior to the competitive season. The competitive phase is
the competition (in-season) period, and the aim is to keep athletes in
top condition while minimizing overtraining and burnout. The transition
phase (off-season) is the point where a competitive phase ends, and the
athlete begins to incorporate active rest and tapers down the intensity
of workouts (Lyakh et al., 2016).]{.mark}

[Linear periodization]{.underline}

[Linear periodization is a traditional method of program design that
aims to gradually increase the intensity of the training load while
simultaneously decreasing volume over a set period of time. Linear
periodization is consistent in its approach and often uses predetermined
timelines or protocols for exercise progression. For example, one
approach uses light loads for the first 4 weeks to develop muscular
endurance and joint stability prior to performing 4 weeks with moderate
loads and, finally, performing 4 weeks using heavy loads to develop
muscular hypertrophy and maximal strength, respectively.]{.mark}

[The fitness professional can use this method with new or experienced
exercisers because it is simple and easy to follow. With this approach,
the load and intensities used within the program increase in a
systematic fashion.]{.mark}

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Timeframe]{.mark}**             **[Intensity: 1-Repetition Maximum
                                     (1RM)]{.mark}**
  ---------------------------------- ------------------------------------
  [Weeks 1 to 4: Stability and       [Light to moderate loads: 60--70% of
  muscular endurance]{.mark}         1RM]{.mark}

  [Weeks 5 to 8: Hypertrophy and     [Moderate to heavy loads: 70--85% of
  strength]{.mark}                   1RM]{.mark}

  [Weeks 9 to 12: Maximal            [Heavy to maximal loads: 85--100%
  strength]{.mark}                   1RM]{.mark}
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

[It is important to recognize that linear periodization schemes can
modify more than load/intensity and can also manipulate exercise
selection, rest periods, and volume (sets + reps) to progress exercise
programs. This is an important consideration for those with goals other
than strength and hypertrophy, such as those seeking weight loss or
endurance athletes seeking improvements in aerobic capacity.]{.mark}

[Undulating periodization]{.underline}

[Undulating periodization, or nonlinear periodization, uses changes in
volume, intensity, and exercise selection to provide loading differences
on a daily or weekly basis. This form of periodization is mentally
beneficial because the workouts do not become stale or boring. Fitness
professionals can also be a little more creative in their approach
because multiple training protocols can be used all in the same week.
For example, a fitness professional can assign a muscular
endurance--focused workout on Monday, a power-focused workout on
Wednesday, and a hypertrophy-focused workout on Friday. Using this
method, multiple styles of training are performed within the same week.
Because of these daily changes, the stress on the body is constantly
varied, which limits the client's ability to plateau in their
performance.]{.mark}

  --------------------- ---------------------- ------------------------ ----------------------- ----------------------
   **[Monday]{.mark}**   **[Tuesday]{.mark}**   **[Wednesday]{.mark}**   **[Thursday]{.mark}**   **[Friday]{.mark}**

        [Muscular                                   [Power-focused                               [Hypertrophy-focused
   endurance--focused                              workout]{.mark}                                 workout]{.mark}
     workout]{.mark}                                                                            
  --------------------- ---------------------- ------------------------ ----------------------- ----------------------
