## Human Movement Science

[Movement represents the integrated functioning of three main systems
within the human body: the nervous system, the skeletal system, and the
muscular system. These collective components and structures represent
the human movement system (HMS). Although separate in structure and
function, the HMS relies on a collaborative effort to form
interdependent links that form a functional kinetic chain. For example,
an individual's arm, shoulder, and spine are interconnected segments
that function together to perform movement.]{.mark}

[If any part of the kinetic chain is injured or not functioning
properly, the entire link is compromised, resulting in less than optimal
performance. Body segments and their movements must be coordinated to
allow for the efficient transfer of energy and power throughout the body
when moving from one body segment to the next. This concept of how the
functioning of one segment of the body can impact other areas is
referred to as the regional interdependence model.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[Regional interdependence emphasizes the importance of integrated HMS
functioning. For example, a client with normal functioning muscular and
nervous systems should be able to complete a front shoulder raise
through the shoulder joint's full range of motion (ROM). However, if
there was articular (joint) system stiffness, the movement may not be
completed through the full ROM, despite a normally functioning muscular
and nervous system. On the other hand, if the nervous system that
supplies the message to the deltoid (shoulder muscle) was not working
properly, a client would not be able to raise their arm despite having
normal articular movement and an intact muscle.]{.mark}

### Biomechanics

[Biomechanics is the study of mechanical laws or principles relating to
movement. In other words, biomechanics uses scientific principles of
physics to study how the body creates movement at the joints, especially
in the context of exercise and sport. Kinesiology is another formal
discipline that studies movement. While kinesiology is still concerned
with the principles of biomechanics, it investigates movement further
because it additionally relates to human anatomy and physiology.]{.mark}

[The exploration of human movement science focuses on the various
motions that the HMS produces and the forces that act on it . Fitness
and sport training require a strong understanding of basic anatomical
terminology, planes of motion, joint motions, muscle actions,
force-couples, levers, forces, and the intramuscular relationship
between force and velocity.]{.mark}

**Biomechanical terminology**

[It is important for fitness professionals to understand the terminology
used in the study of biomechanics and kinesiology. This prepares them
with a better understanding of and ability to apply the scientific
principles behind assessing clients' movements and implementing exercise
programs with clients.]{.mark}

[It is important to keep in mind that biomechanical terms always refer
to the body in the anatomic position. The anatomic position is when the
body is in a standing posture, with the arms hanging down by the sides
and palms facing forward. This position is important because it gives a
universal point of reference from which all allied health professionals
can accurately discuss human biomechanics.]{.mark}

**Anatomic locations**

[Anatomic locations describe the relative positioning of segments of the
body. Anatomical terms commonly used in the fitness industry include
*medial, lateral, contralateral, ipsilateral, anterior, posterior,
proximal, distal, inferior*, and *superior*. These terms are used to
describe where various bodily structures are located in more specific
ways than common terms such as *above* and *below* or *front* and
*rear*.]{.mark}

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Anatomic              **[Definition]{.mark}**   **[Example]{.mark}**
  Location]{.mark}**                                 
  ------------------------ ------------------------- --------------------------
  [Medial]{.mark}          [Relatively closer to the [The adductors (inner
                           midline of the            thigh muscles) attach\
                           body]{.mark}              to the medial side of the
                                                     femur (thigh
                                                     bone).]{.mark}

  [Lateral]{.mark}         [Relatively farther away  [The ears are positioned
                           from the midline or\      laterally on the\
                           toward the outside of the head.]{.mark}
                           body]{.mark}              

  [Contralateral]{.mark}   [Positioned on the        [The right foot is
                           opposite side of the      contralateral to the left
                           body]{.mark}              hand.]{.mark}

  [Ipsilateral]{.mark}     [Positioned on the same   [The right foot is
                           side of the body]{.mark}  ipsilateral to the right
                                                     hand.]{.mark}

  [Anterior]{.mark}        [Positioned on or toward  [The quadriceps are
                           the front of the\         located on the anterior\
                           body]{.mark}              aspect of the
                                                     thigh.]{.mark}

  [Posterior]{.mark}       [Positioned on or toward  [The hamstring complex is
                           the back of the\          located on the\
                           body]{.mark}              posterior aspect of the
                                                     thigh.]{.mark}

  [Proximal]{.mark}        [Positioned nearest to    [The wrist is more
                           the centre of the body\   proximal to the elbow
                           or other identified       than\
                           reference point]{.mark}   the fingers.]{.mark}

  [Distal]{.mark}          [Positioned farthest from [The ankle is more distal
                           the centre of the\        to the hip than the\
                           body or other identified  knee.]{.mark}
                           reference point]{.mark}   

  [Inferior]{.mark}        [Positioned below an      [The soleus (calf muscle)
                           identified reference\     is inferior to the\
                           point]{.mark}             hamstring complex.]{.mark}

  [Superior]{.mark}        [Positioned above an      [The pelvis is superior to
                           identified reference      the tibia (shin
                           point]{.mark}             bone).]{.mark}
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Planes of motion, axes, and joint motions**

[The universally accepted method of describing human movement is in
reference to three dimensions and is based on a system of three
imaginary planes: sagittal, frontal, and transverse. These planes are
positioned at right angles, so they intersect in the centre. Although
movements can be dominant in a single plane of motion, it is important
to remember that typical daily movement rarely occurs strictly in one
plane of motion. However, movements, joint motions, and many common
exercises are classified as being predominantly in a specific plane of
motion if they run along that plane (i.e., parallel to it). Movement
patterns that take the body through motions in more than one plane are
termed *multiplanar*.]{.mark}

[Movement in each plane occurs on an axis running perpendicular to that
plane, much like the axle that a car wheel revolves around. This is
known as *joint motion*. Joint motions are termed for their action in
each of the three planes of motion. A more specific term used to
describe the movements we can observe or see is osteokinematic, whereas
the movements taking place inside the joint itself that we cannot see
are referred to as arthrokinematic movement. Osteo- and arthrokinematic
movements are both required for normal movement to occur.]{.mark}

**The sagittal plane**

[The sagittal plane is an imaginary line that bisects the body into
right and left sides. Sagittal plane joint motion occurs around a
medial-lateral axis, as is seen when bending at the knees. Movements in
the sagittal plane include flexion and extension. Flexion is a bending
movement in which the relative angle between two adjacent segments
decreases. Extension is a straightening movement in which the relative
angle between two adjacent segments increases.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[Hyperextension is the extension of a joint beyond the normal limit or
ROM and may result in injury. The term *hyperextension* is reserved for
movements where normal extension values have been exceeded and should
not be used to describe someone who has full available extension
ROM.]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[To better understand the sagittal plane, imagine being stuck in a very
narrow hallway with no room to move to the left or right or to rotate in
any fashion. In addition, the walls are made completely of glass, which
you don't want to break. Based on this analogy, the only available
movements in our narrow sagittal plane hallway are front-to-back and
up-and-down movements.]{.mark}

[Flexion and extension occur in many joints in the body, including the
spine, shoulder, elbow, wrist, hip, knee, foot, and hand. At the ankle,
flexion is referred to as dorsiflexion and extension is plantar flexion.
Examples of predominantly sagittal plane exercises include biceps curls,
triceps pushdowns, squats, front lunges, calf raises, walking, running,
vertical jump, climbing stairs, and shooting a basketball.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[Hip Flexion in the Sagittal Plane]{.mark}

[Hip flexion occurs when an individual decreases the angle between the
femur (thigh bone) and the pelvis or lumbar spine. This can occur when
an individual elevates the knee toward the abdomen (femoral-on-pelvic
hip flexion). During this motion, the pelvis and spine are fixed while
the femur rotates. Another version of hip flexion can occur when an
individual bends forward from the trunk (as if touching their toes). In
this instance, the pelvis and lumbar spine rotate together over a fixed
femur (pelvic-on-femoral rotation).]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[To best remember dorsiflexion, think about the dorsal fin of a dolphin
on the top side of its body. In this context, *dorsal* represents the
top side of the foot and the direction it moves when the ankle
flexes.]{.mark}

[To remember plantar flexion, think about planting a garden in the
ground. In this context, *plantar* represents the bottom side of the
foot and the direction it moves when the ankle extends.]{.mark}

**The frontal plane**

[The frontal plane bisects the body to create front and back halves.
Frontal plane joint motion occurs around an anterior-posterior axis,
like is seen at the shoulder when doing jumping jacks. Movements in the
frontal plane include abduction and adduction of the limbs (relative to
the trunk), lateral flexion of the spine, and eversion and inversion at
the foot and ankle complex.]{.mark}

[Abduction is a movement away from the midline of the body. Similar to
extension, it is an increase in the angle between two adjoining
segments, except in the frontal plane. Adduction is a movement of a
segment toward the midline of the body. Like flexion, it is a decrease
in the angle between two adjoining segments, except in the frontal
plane.]{.mark}

[Lateral flexion is the bending of the spine from side to side in the
frontal plane. Additionally, similar to flexion and extension, joint
motion at the feet is termed a bit differently. Eversion and inversion
follow the same principle as lateral flexion but relate specifically to
the pendulum-like movement of the calcaneus (heel bone) and tarsals
(ankle bones) in the frontal plane. When a foot everts, the calcaneus
swings laterally (away from the midline); when a foot inverts, the
calcaneus swings medially (toward the midline). Examples of
predominantly frontal plane exercises include jumping jacks, side
lunges, lateral shoulder raises, and side shuffling.]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

To better understand the frontal plane, imagine walls in front of and
behind you, with no room to move forward or backward or to rotate. Like
last time, the walls are made completely of glass, which you do not want
to break. As a result, movements in the frontal plane are primarily
side-to-side motions.

**The transverse plane**

[The transverse plane bisects the body to create upper and lower halves.
Transverse plane motion occurs around a longitudinal or vertical axis.
Movements in the transverse plane include internal rotation and external
rotation for the limbs, right and left rotation for the head and trunk,
horizontal abduction and horizontal adduction of the limbs, and
radioulnar pronation and radioulnar supination forearm rotation.
Examples of predominantly transverse plane exercises include performing
a cable trunk rotation, a dumbbell chest fly, and swinging a bat or golf
club.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[The transverse plane involves rotational movement of the head, torso,
arms, and legs. In addition, movement in the transverse plane involves
horizontal abduction and adduction, which can occur at either the
shoulders or hips. For example, a machine chest fly exercise involves
horizontal abduction and adduction at the shoulder, whereas a hip
abductor machine involves horizontal abduction and adduction at the
hips.]{.mark}

[l]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[Just like with dorsiflexion, plantar flexion, eversion, and inversion
in the sagittal and frontal planes, there is unique terminology for
transverse plane movement of the feet. In this context, rotating the
foot outward at the ankle (with no rotation of the leg as a whole) is
called abduction (toes rotating laterally), while inward rotation of the
foot at the ankle is called adduction (toes pointing medially).]{.mark}

[To move the body functionally, however, the foot and ankle complex
rarely performs its single plane movements in isolation. Instead, the
ankle moves through its own version of pronation and supination, which
is different from radioulnar pronation and supination. Pronation of the
foot is a multiplanar movement consisting of the combination of
eversion, dorsiflexion, and ankle abduction. Supination of the foot is
then the combination of inversion, plantar flexion, and ankle adduction.
During gait (walking and running), the foot and ankle complex moves
between pronation during force reduction (when the foot lands) and
supination during force production (when the foot pushes off the ground)
with every step.]{.mark}

**Scapular motion**

[Motions of the scapulae (i.e., the shoulder blades) are important for
the fitness professional to be familiar with to ensure proper movement
of the shoulder complex. Isolated scapular movements--- termed
*translations*, because they do not rotate around a fixed axis---are
primarily retraction, protraction, elevation, and depression.]{.mark}

[Scapular retraction occurs when the shoulder blades come closer
together. Scapular protraction occurs when the shoulder blades move
further away from each other. Scapular depression occurs when the
shoulder blades move downward, and scapular elevation occurs when the
shoulder blades move upward toward the ears.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[Scapular retraction requires several muscles, including the middle
trapezius and rhomboids. Scapular protraction primarily requires the
serratus anterior muscle, with some assistance from the pectoral
muscles.]{.mark}

**Movement attributes**

[The HMS is complex and requires not only the integrative function of
different systems but also cooperative efforts within the systems.
Generally speaking, movement can be described in terms of the
predominant movement plane and the specific motions at the joints;
however, movement can also be classified as being normal or
dysfunctional. Normal movement represents efficient, cooperative
functioning of the skeletal, nervous, and muscular systems. Normal
movement requires a joint to be able to move through its full ROM, which
requires normal osteo- and arthrokinematics.]{.mark}

[The amount of movement determined to be normal would depend on the
activity of interest. For example, certain sports require greater joint
ROMs than standard activities of daily living, as is seen in the
difference between the motion of the shoulders when pitching a baseball
and simply washing one's hair. Full ROM requires normal elasticity of
the capsule and ligaments surrounding the joint and normal muscle length
and flexibility, as well as normally functioning neurological and
muscular systems. Clients with hypermobility (excessive ROM at a joint)
generally would be expected to have a lack of firm ligamentous support,
whereas those with hypomobility (limited ROM at a joint) generally have
restricted length of the muscular structures that cross the
joint.]{.mark}

**Isokinetic**

[During isokinetic muscle actions, the muscle shortens at a constant
speed over the full ROM. An isokinetic muscle action requires the use of
expensive and sophisticated equipment that measures the amount of force
generated by the muscles and adjusts the resistance (load) so that no
matter how much muscular tension is produced, movement speed remains
constant. In other words, the harder an individual pushes or pulls, the
more resistance they feel. During a full isokinetic contraction, the
tension in the muscle is at its maximum throughout the whole ROM, which
is believed to improve strength and endurance. However, the types of
movements that are able to be performed on isokinetic machines are
rather limited, and these machines often are only seen in rehabilitation
clinics or exercise physiology laboratories.]{.mark}

**The muscle action spectrum**

[Because practically every exercise consists of an eccentric, isometric,
and concentric muscle action to complete one repetition, the movement
through those muscle actions is referred to as the muscle action
spectrum. A dumbbell curl exercise is a clear example to illustrate this
concept. The initial movement requires the biceps brachii to shorten to
generate enough force to overcome the weight of the dumbbell in the
individual's hand (i.e., the force of gravity pulling the dumbbell's
mass toward the ground), causing the elbows to flex and the dumbbells to
move up toward the front of the shoulder. This is the concentric phase
of the exercise.]{.mark}

[Once the dumbbells are raised to the front of the shoulder, the
individual holds this position. Because the length of the muscle does
not change while generating force to hold this position, it is
considered the isometric portion of the exercise. As the individual
lowers the dumbbells back to the starting position, the biceps muscles
must now generate forces while lengthening to decelerate the force of
the dumbbells against the pull of gravity; this is the eccentric portion
of the exercise.]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[When performing a biceps curl exercise with the palm facing up, the
biceps brachii is the primary muscle targeted. Changing the hand
position to palm down targets the brachialis to a greater degree,
whereas performing the exercise with the thumb up (hammer curls) targets
the brachioradialis muscle to a greater extent. During all three
versions of the curl exercise, all of the elbow flexors are recruited
concurrently; however, the degree of recruitment for each muscle differs
with each hand and forearm position.]{.mark}

[A second example to help illustrate muscle actions is the squat
exercise. To initiate the squat from a standing position, the individual
squats down, flexing at the hips, knees, and ankles. As the individual
squats downward, the gluteal muscles and quadriceps mechanically
lengthen while simultaneously decelerating the force of the individual's
bodyweight; this is the eccentric muscle action of the squat exercise.
The isometric muscle action occurs when the individual pauses at the
bottom position and no joint motion is visible. Lastly, the concentric
muscle action occurs when the individual extends at the ankles, knees,
and hips to return to the starting position, concentrically contracting
the gluteal muscles and quadriceps (i.e., the lifting phase).]{.mark}

TRAINING TIP

[The integrated function of the HMS can be recognized during a squat.
Clients with limited dorsiflexion of the ankle will be limited in the
depth of their squat during the eccentric phase. A quick method for
these individuals to gain a deeper squat ROM is to place a small board
(or weight plates) under their heels. A longer-term solution would be to
address the stiffness of the ankle joints by performing routine
stretching.]{.mark}

## Functional anatomy of muscles

[To more effectively understand human movement and to design efficient
exercise programs, it is important to view muscles' capacities to
function in all planes of motion and through the entire muscle action
spectrum (eccentric, isometric, concentric). In addition, muscles can
also work synergistically to produce force, stabilize the body, and
reduce force under direct control of the nervous system. The more that
functional anatomy is understood, the more specific an exercise program
can become. To explore the muscles of the body in more detail, refer to
Appendix C.]{.mark}

**Muscles as movers**

[Muscles provide the human body with a variety of functions that allow
for the manipulation of forces placed on the body to either produce,
stabilize, or resist movement. During functional movements, a muscle can
be categorized as either an agonist, synergist, stabilizer, or
antagonist depending on the joint motion being performed.]{.mark}

[Agonists are muscles that act as the prime movers for a joint motion;
in other words, they are the muscles most responsible for generating the
primary forces for a particular movement. For example, the gluteus
maximus is the agonist for hip extension, the quadriceps are the
agonists for knee extension, the anterior deltoid is the agonist for
shoulder flexion, the biceps brachii is the agonist for elbow flexion,
and the triceps brachii is the agonist for elbow extension.]{.mark}

[Synergist muscles create forces to assist prime movers but are not
intended as the primary force producer for a given joint motion. For
example, the hamstring complex and the erector spinae (muscles of the
back) are synergistic with the gluteus maximus during hip extension,
whereas the brachioradialis and brachialis (forearm muscles) assist the
biceps brachii during a biceps curl. Additional examples include the
triceps brachii assisting the pectoral muscles during a chest press and
the biceps brachii assisting the latissimus dorsi during a
pull-up.]{.mark}

[Stabilizer muscles contract isometrically to support and stabilize the
joints, while the prime movers and synergists move through the entire
muscle action spectrum to perform a movement. For example, the
transversus abdominis (a deep abdominal muscle), internal obliques, and
multifidus (deep muscles of the spine) stabilize the LPHC during hip
extension. Another example is the rotator cuff muscles (supraspinatus,
infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis), which stabilize the
shoulder during upper extremity movements.]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[An interesting fact regarding stabilization is that certain muscles
have the ability to stabilize a joint by contracting automatically in
anticipation of movement. This anticipatory stabilization effect is
referred to as feed-forward activation.]{.mark}

[Lastly, antagonist muscles perform the opposite action of the prime
mover. For example, the biceps brachii (an elbow flexor) is an
antagonist to the triceps brachii during elbow extension. Conversely,
during elbow flexion, the triceps become the antagonist to the biceps.
Another example includes how the hip flexor complex is antagonistic to
the gluteus maximus during hip extension, whereas the gluteus maximus is
antagonistic to the hip flexor complex during hip flexion.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[As previously mentioned, muscles can often take on different roles
depending on the joint motion that is being performed. For example, the
infraspinatus muscle of the rotator cuff takes up the role of agonist
(prime mover) for shoulder external rotation, the role of synergist when
abducting the shoulder to reach overhead, and the role of stabilizer
during other joint motions of the shoulder.]{.mark}

**Open- versus closed-chain movements**

[In the health and fitness industry, exercises are often classified
based on different load- or weight-bearing characteristics. One such
classification is to describe an exercise as being either open- or
closed-chain. Classifying an exercise in this manner may provide insight
into muscle recruitment patterns, the degree of weight-bearing, and the
number of joints involved.]{.mark}

[Closed-chain movements]{.underline}

[The primary characteristic of closed-chain movements is that the distal
segments, such as a person's hands or feet, are fixed and remain in
contact with a stationary surface. Additionally, closed-chain exercises
often require the movement of multiple joints in a predictable manner
with the contraction of multiple muscle groups. While not required, a
majority of closed-chain activities are weight-bearing. Examples of
closed-chain exercises include push-ups, squats, pull-ups, or
lunges.]{.mark}

[During a squat or lunge, the distal segments (the legs) are fixed on a
stable surface and movement occurs at the hips, knees, and ankles;
multiple muscles are activated, including the entire gluteal and
quadriceps groups. The resistance of bodyweight or a weighted bar is
applied simultaneously to all the joints of the lower extremity. The
same can be said for the upper extremities during push-ups or pull-ups,
with the hands fixed either on the floor or on a static bar. During
these movements, the body is moving while transferring the force back
into the fixed, stable surface, with multiple joints in the kinetic
chain dealing with the resistance.]{.mark}

[Open-chain movements]{.underline}

[The primary characteristic of open-chain movements is that the distal
segments (hands and feet) are not fixed, and they are free to move in
space. Additionally, open-chain exercises have independent joint
movement of only the segments distal to the moving joint itself. While
not required, a majority of open-chain activities are
nonweight-bearing.]{.mark}

[Examples of open-chain exercises include lat pulldown, biceps curl,
bench press, leg curl, and leg extension exercises. Unlike closed-chain
exercises, which activate multiple muscles, open-chain exercises tend to
focus on isolating the prime mover muscles.]{.mark}

Helpful Hint

[Closed-chain exercises involve applying force into an immovable object,
such as the floor, wall, or pull-up bar. In other words, the hands or
feet are typically fixed and do not move.]{.mark}

[Open-chain exercises involve the ability to freely move the limbs, such
as the hands and feet.]{.mark}

[For example, a pull-up is a closed-chain exercise for the back
musculature, whereas the lat pulldown is an open-chain exercise for the
same muscle group.]{.mark}

### Muscular force

[Force is defined as the interaction between two entities or bodies that
results in either the acceleration or deceleration of an object. Forces
are characterized by magnitude (how much) and direction (which way they
are moving). The HMS is designed to manipulate variable forces from many
directions to effectively produce movement. As such, the fitness
professional must gain an understanding of some of the more pertinent
forces that the HMS must deal with and how they affect motion.]{.mark}

**Length-tension relationships**

[A length-tension relationship refers to the association between the
resting length of a muscle and the amount of internal tension it can
produce at that resting length. Each muscle in the body has an optimal
muscle length at which the actin and myosin filaments within the
sarcomere have the greatest degree of overlap. At that optimal length,
the ability of myosin to make a maximal amount of connections with actin
results in the potential for maximal force production of that
muscle.]{.mark}

[At both extremes of muscle shortening or lengthening there is a
diminished ability to produce force. When a muscle has chronically low
neural activation and is longer than it should be, there is a reduced
amount of actin and myosin overlap, reducing the amount of force that
can be produced at that length. When a muscle has chronically high
neural activation and is regularly held in a contracted (shortened)
state, it places the actin and myosin in a state of maximal overlap and
allows for no further movement to occur between the filaments, also
reducing its force output potential.]{.mark}

**Muscle balance**

[Length-tension relationships relate closely to the concept of muscle
balance. Recall that on each side of a joint there are agonist and
antagonist muscles; when one contracts and shortens, the other has to
relax and lengthen if movement is to occur. When all muscles surrounding
a joint have optimal length-tension relationships, neither side is
pulling harder than the other, and they will hold that joint in an
optimal position for the most efficient movement.]{.mark}

[If a muscle's resting length is either too long or too short on one
side of a joint, however, it has an altered length-tension relationship.
This creates imbalance around the joint, where one side is contracted
and pulling more than it should be and the other side is allowing to be
pulled into a lengthened state with reduced actin/myosin overlap,
putting the joint into a suboptimal resting position.]{.mark}

[A joint being held in a suboptimal position like this is the basis for
poor posture. For example, if a person's adductor muscles on the inside
of the thighs are in a contracted/shortened position and consequently
the abductor muscles on the outside of the hips (i.e., gluteus medius)
are in a lengthened position, a knock-kneed posture will be created,
which puts unnecessary stress on the joints and can lead to discomfort
and increased risk of injury.]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[The scientific term that describes the nervous system's role in the
contract-relax relationship between agonists and antagonists is called
reciprocal inhibition. When the agonist for a movement receives a signal
(a motor neuron impulse) to contract, the central nervous system also
sends a signal that inhibits the antagonist's activation signals at the
same time, causing it to relax. For example, to perform the biceps curl
exercise, the biceps brachii (agonist) must contract, while
simultaneously, the triceps brachii (antagonist) must relax for the
movement to occur.]{.mark}

[When muscles have altered length-tension relationships, the normal
process of reciprocal inhibition becomes altered. Altered reciprocal
inhibition is when an agonist muscle chronically receives an activation
signal causing the functional antagonist to chronically receive the
inhibitory signal.]{.mark}

[When a muscle is chronically overactive, it is in a state of elevated
neural activity, which causes the muscle to be in a constant state of
contraction. When a muscle is chronically underactive, it is in a state
of inhibited neural drive. In this situation, the overactive muscle
pulls the joint too much in one direction, while the underactive muscle
does not activate enough to resist that pull. The result is that the
joint is held in a suboptimal position (poor postural alignment) due to
a muscle imbalance.]{.mark}

[Formal assessments of a client's posture will help identify muscle
imbalances. Then, flexibility techniques can be used to calm down muscle
overactivity, and strengthening techniques can be used to improve the
neural activation of underactive muscles. This helps restore optimal
length-tension relationships within the muscles, restores balance around
the joint, and allows the joint to be held in its most efficient neutral
position.]{.mark}

### Stretch-shortening cycle

[The stretch-shortening cycle is a term used to describe a loaded
eccentric muscle action that prepares muscles and tendons for a rapid
concentric contraction. The eccentric muscle action represents the
*stretch* component, which stores elastic energy from the springlike
nature of contractile tissue. The stored energy is a result of the
series elastic component of muscle and tendon (mostly tendon).]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[The stretch-shortening cycle is similar to stretching a rubber band.
Stretching the rubber band stores elastic energy. Once the rubber band
is released, the elastic energy is transformed into kinetic energy, and
the rubber band flies through the air. The same sort of principle
applies to our body's muscle and connective tissue. When a person needs
to jump, they will first perform a shallow squat prior to initiating the
jump---this is the body's version of pulling on the rubber band.]{.mark}

[After energy is stored, the contractile tissue releases this elastic
energy during the concentric phase. The storage and release of this
elastic energy increases force production if the time between the
eccentric and concentric phase is rapid. Specifically, the amortization
phase is used to describe this transition. The goal of increased force
production, hence, improved performance, depends on a rapid amortization
phase. A rapid amortization phase requires both contractile tissue
storage of energy and the neurological stretch reflex.]{.mark}

[Use of the stretch-shortening cycle in exercise is the basis for
plyometric training, in which jump-landing tasks eccentrically load the
muscles (the landing) to achieve a more explosive concentric contraction
(the jump). The more rapidly a client can move through the amortization
phase, the more powerful the concentric contraction will be, which is
known as the integrated performance paradigm. When executed properly,
this type of training helps produce the necessary neural and muscular
adaptations to improve speed, power, and sport-specific
improvements.]{.mark}

[For example, the appropriate implementation of a depth-jump exercise
involves jumping off a box and dropping immediately into a squat
position for the landing. Moving into this squat position stores elastic
energy via the series elastic component, then the release of that stored
elastic energy combines with the concentric contraction to more
powerfully drive the jump. If the amortization phase is prolonged,
stored energy will dissipate, the neurological stretch reflex will not
be optimally activated, and the concentric unloading phase will be less
powerful.]{.mark}

[The concept of the stretch-shortening cycle can also be applied within
the context of agility drills, which require repeated switching from
deceleration to acceleration. This switch is the stretch-shortening
cycle in action, requiring a rapid reversal of muscle action from
eccentric (loading) to isometric (amortization) to concentric
(unloading). Essentially, any time a muscle is eccentrically loaded,
those elastic forces can be amortized and released to provide a more
powerful concentric contraction.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[In the powerlifting world, athletes competing in the bench press will
often rapidly lower the bar toward their chest before pressing it back
up. This technique, while not recommended for everyday exercisers
because it is potentially dangerous, uses the integrated performance
paradigm to add a bit of extra force to the concentric phase of the
lift.]{.mark}

**Force-velocity curve**

[The force-velocity curve describes the inverse relationship between
force and velocity and refers to a muscle's ability to produce tension
at differing contraction velocities. As the velocity of a concentric
muscle action increases, its ability to produce force decreases, while
the ability to produce force increases as the velocity of a concentric
contraction decreases.]{.mark}

[For example, during a heavy barbell back squat, the muscles produce a
high amount of force; however, the movement is rather slow. Conversely,
during a squat jump exercise, the velocity of movement is high; however,
the force output is low (when compared to a heavy barbell back
squat).]{.mark}

[During an eccentric muscle action, as the contraction velocity
increases, the ability to develop force also increases. This is believed
to be the result of the use of the elastic component of the connective
tissue surrounding and within the muscle---similar to the loading phase
of the stretch-shortening cycle. Simply put, the faster the eccentric
contraction, the more force the muscle is capable of decelerating. When
plotted on a graph, the inverse relationship between eccentric and
concentric contraction velocities and the amount of force they produce
displays the force-velocity curve.]{.mark}

**Force-couple relationships**

[Muscles produce a force that is transmitted to bones through their
connective tissues, known as tendons. Because muscles are recruited as
groups, many muscles will transmit force onto their respective bones,
creating movement at the joints. This synergistic action of multiple
muscles to produce movement around a joint is known as a force-couple
relationship.]{.mark}

[Muscles in a force-couple provide divergent pulls on the bone or bones
they connect with. That is to say, each muscle has different attachment
sites, pulls at a different angle, and creates a different force on that
joint. The motion that results from the combination of differing forces
is dependent on the structure of the joint and the collective pull of
each muscle involved. For example, the middle trapezius, lower
trapezius, and serratus anterior all pull on the scapula (shoulder
blade) in different directions to assist with shoulder
abduction.]{.mark}

[CRITICAL]{.mark}

[Muscles are connected to bones via tendons. When a muscle contracts,
the muscle's tendon pulls on its respective bone(s) to create joint
motion. Muscles can only pull on their respective bones---muscles cannot
actively push.]{.mark}

[In reality, however, every movement produced must involve all muscle
actions (eccentric, isometric, concentric) and all functions (agonists,
synergists, stabilizers, and antagonists) to ensure proper joint motion
as well as to eliminate unwanted or unnecessary motion. Thus, all
muscles working in unison to produce a desired movement are said to be
working in a force-couple relationship.]{.mark}

[To ensure that the HMS moves properly, it must have proper force-couple
relationships around its joints, which can only happen if the muscles
are at the right length-tension relationships and the joints have proper
arthrokinematics. Collectively, proper length-tension relationships in
the muscles allow for proper posture and motion at the joints, which in
turn allow for optimal force-couple relationships that produce the most
efficient movement.]{.mark}

### Muscular systems of the body

[Not only do muscles work together in force-couple relationships around
the joints but they also work together throughout the body forming a
network of interworking systems that work to both stabilize and create
movement in all three planes of motion. There are two overarching
categories of these systems, known as the local and global muscular
systems.]{.mark}

**Local muscular system**

[Local muscles generally attach on or near the vertebrae and serve the
primary purpose of stabilizing the trunk of the body. The local muscular
system is composed of the *inner unit* of the core and includes the
rotatores, multifidus, transversus abdominis, diaphragm, pelvic floor,
and quadratus lumborum. Many of these muscles can be actively contracted
and may also activate automatically in anticipation of limb or trunk
movements, a neurological process known as the feed-forward activation.
The local muscular system is thought to offer a segmental stabilization
effect on the spine. Due to this, some commonly refer to it simply as
the stabilization system of the core.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[Evidence has shown that the feed-forward stabilization effect from the
transversus abdominis and internal oblique musculature is delayed among
people with lower back pain. These intrinsic, core stabilizer muscles
are often underactive in individuals with overactive hip flexors,
causing an anterior tilting of the pelvis and low-back arch.]{.mark}

[It should be noted, however, that there are also stabilization
force-couples working together systematically in other regions of the
body, known as joint support systems. For example, the rotator cuff of
the shoulder is a group of muscles functioning in a similar manner to
provide stabilization support for the glenohumeral (shoulder)
joint.]{.mark}

**Global muscular system**

[The global muscular system is comprised of larger muscles that initiate
movements and tend to function across one or more joints. These muscles
are generally larger and act as prime movers during many functional
tasks, such as pushing, pulling, squatting, and walking. Because of
this, the global muscular system is commonly referred to as the movement
system. Examples of global muscles include the rectus abdominis, erector
spinae, and latissimus dorsi.]{.mark}

[The global muscular system's main interconnected function is to
transfer forces through the LPHC to create the most efficient movement
possible while also providing additional support to protect the trunk
and spine as the body moves. To better illustrate how muscles of the
movement system work together in synchrony, the global muscles can be
categorized into subsystems, which include the deep longitudinal,
posterior oblique, anterior oblique, and lateral subsystems. These
muscular subsystems highlight the functional elements of regional
interdependence, as well as the necessary extensions of force-couple
relationships. Without these subsystems, normal movement would be
impaired, and the risk of injury and reduced performance would increase.
Each of the subsystems is mirrored on the left and right sides of the
body.]{.mark}

**Deep longitudinal subsystem**

[The deep longitudinal subsystem (DLS) includes muscles of the lower
leg, hamstrings, and lower back region. Working together
synergistically, these muscles create a contracting tension to absorb
and control ground reaction forces during gait (walking, running). For
example, during or just prior to the heel strike phase of running, the
long head of the biceps femoris (hamstring) contracts eccentrically to
decelerate knee extension. Because the hamstrings attach at the pelvis,
forces are transmitted up to the lower back muscles (erector spinae).
Thus, the regional interdependence between the lower extremity ankle
musculature, the hamstrings, and lower back is highlighted.]{.mark}

**Posterior oblique subsystem**

[The posterior oblique subsystem (POS) is made up of the latissimus
dorsi, thoracolumbar fascia (connective tissue of the low-back), and
contralateral gluteus maximus. The latissimus dorsi and contralateral
gluteus maximus create a nearly straight line with each other across the
sacroiliac joint (a joint between the sacrum and the ilium
bones).]{.mark}

[When the muscles of the POS contract, they produce a pulling force
across the thoracolumbar fascia and a stabilization force at the
sacroiliac joint. When mirrored for both the left and right sides of the
body, the POS can be seen to form an X across the sacroiliac joint,
creating the divergent tensions that lead to its stabilization
effect.]{.mark}

[This system works together with the DLS during gait just prior to or
during heel strike as the gluteus maximus and latissimus dorsi are
eccentrically loaded. The force-couple relationship of the gluteus
maximus and latissimus dorsi are highlighted here, which together
provide a functional element of stability to the LPHC as a whole.
Further to this point, the regional interdependence of the LPHC, middle,
and upper back is highlighted by the interaction of the POS
musculature.]{.mark}

**Anterior oblique subsystem**

[The anterior oblique subsystem (AOS) is similar to the POS, just on the
anterior side of the body. The muscles include the obliques, the
adductor (inner) thigh muscles, and the hip external rotators. The
obliques and contralateral (opposite) adductors are the most common
visualization of this subsystem because of the X pattern made across the
front of the body. The AOS creates stability from the trunk, through the
pelvis, and to the hips and contributes to rotational movement. The AOS
and POS work together as a global force-couple in enabling rotational
force production in the transverse plane.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[During normal walking and running, the pelvis rotates in the transverse
plane to facilitate the necessary momentum for the swing phase of gait
where leg and thigh are advanced forward in the sagittal plane.]{.mark}

**Lateral subsystem**

[The lateral subsystem (LS) is made up of the lateral hip (gluteus
medius) and medial thigh muscles (adductors) and the contralateral
quadratus lumborum, all of which provide movement in the frontal plane.
Together, these muscles are tasked with creating and maintaining frontal
plane (side-to-side) stabilization of the LPHC during movement.]{.mark}

[The LS functions during numerous activities, which include movements
that require a single-leg stance phase, such as seen during gait,
running, and lunges. Furthermore, the LS provides stability of the lower
extremities to prevent abnormal or unwanted frontal plane movement
patterns during activities. For example, the LS prevents unwanted hip
and thigh adduction during the squat. An improperly working LS may be
evident among those individuals who are unable to maintain appropriate
lower-extremity alignment in the frontal plane (knees collapsing inward
during a squat).]{.mark}

**Subsystem coordination**

[While these subsystems have been described individually, it is
important to recognize their coordinated and complex actions during
movements. During physical activity, the subsystems work synergistically
to perform efficient movements and stabilize the spine and
pelvis.]{.mark}

[Although the subsystems have been described only in the context of
muscle activity, fitness professionals must remember that all movement
relies on the nervous and skeletal systems as well. A deficit in joint
function or failure of the nervous system to supply the appropriate
signal can potentially lead to improper movement patterns, even if all
muscles in a subsystem have proper length-tension relationships.]{.mark}

### Muscular leverage and Arthrokinematics

[The amount of force that the HMS can produce relies on not only motor
unit recruitment and muscle size but also the lever system of the joint.
The musculoskeletal system is composed of bones, muscles, tendons, and
ligaments, all of which create a series of levers and pulleys that
generate force against external objects.]{.mark}

[Skeletal muscles are attached to bones by tendons and produce movement
by bending the skeleton at movable joints. Recall that joint motion is
caused by muscles pulling on bones; muscles cannot actively push.
Particular attachments of muscles to bones will determine how much force
the muscle is capable of generating. For example, the quadriceps muscles
can produce more force than muscles of the hand.]{.mark}

[Most motion uses the principle of levers. A lever consists of a rigid
bar that pivots around a stationary pivot point (fulcrum). In the human
body, the fulcrum is the joint axis, bones are the levers, muscles
create the motion (effort), and resistance can be the weight of a body
part, or the weight of an object.]{.mark}

[Levers are classified as first, second, and third class, depending on
the relations among the fulcrum, the effort, and the resistance.
First-class levers have the fulcrum in the middle, like a seesaw.
Nodding the head is an example of a first-class lever, with the top of
the spinal column as the fulcrum.]{.mark}

[Second-class levers have a resistance in the middle with the fulcrum
and effort on either side, similar to a load in a wheelbarrow where the
axle and wheel are the fulcrum points. The body acts as a second-class
lever when one engages in a full-body push-up or calf raise. Using the
calf raise exercise as an example, the ball of the foot is the fulcrum,
the body weight is the resistance, and the effort is applied by the calf
musculature.]{.mark}

[Third-class levers have the effort placed between the resistance and
the fulcrum. The effort always travels a shorter distance and must be
greater than the resistance. Most limbs of the human body operate as
third-class levers. An example of a third-class lever is the human
forearm; the fulcrum is the elbow, the effort is applied by the biceps
brachii muscle, and the load is in the hand, such as a dumbbell when
performing a biceps curl. Another example of a third-class lever is the
standing hamstring curl, whereby the knee joint is the fulcrum,
hamstring muscle is the effort, and resistance is at the ankle.]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[When trying to remember the levers, think of the pneumonic F-R-E-1-2-3.
This means that fulcrum is in middle for a first-class lever (F, 1),
resistance is in the middle for the second-class lever (R, 2), with the
effort in middle for a third-class lever (E, 3).]{.mark}

[Applying the concept of levers to the principles of the HMS, bones act
as lever arms that move a load from the force applied by the muscles.
This movement around an axis can be termed rotary motion and implies
that the bones rotate around joints. This turning effect of the joint is
often referred to as torque. Torque is a measurement of the amount of
force that can cause an object to rotate around an axis. Torque relies
on force, the length of the lever arm, and the angle between the force
application and the lever arm.]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[An example of torque is using a wrench to loosen a bolt. The wrench
serves as a lever, and torque would be a product of the force applied to
the wrench and the length of the wrench's handle. Increasing the length
of the wrench's handle would increase the torque applied to the
bolt.]{.mark}

[In resistance training, torque is applied so we can move our joints.
Because the neuromuscular system is ultimately responsible for
manipulating force, the amount of leverage the HMS will have (for any
given movement) depends on the leverage of the muscles in relation to
the resistance. The difference between the distance from the weight to
the centre of the joint, the muscle's attachment, and the line of pull
determines the efficiency with which the muscles manipulate the
movement.]{.mark}

[Because we cannot alter the attachment sites or the line of pull of our
muscles through the tendon, the easiest way to alter the amount of
torque generated at a joint is to move the resistance. In other words,
the closer the weight is to the point of rotation, the less torque it
creates. The farther away the weight is from the point of rotation, the
more torque it creates. From a biomechanical perspective, the distance a
weight is from the joint it is acting on directly determines the effort
required of a muscle to move the weight. Meaning, the farther the
distance, the harder the muscle must work, thus, the greater activation
of the muscle.]{.mark}

[For example, when holding a dumbbell straight out to the side at arm's
length (shoulder abduction), the weight may be approximately 24 inches
from the centre of the shoulder joint. The prime mover for shoulder
abduction is the deltoid muscle. If its attachment is approximately 2
inches from the joint centre, there is a difference of 22 inches (11
times greater). However, if the weight is moved closer to the joint
centre, to the elbow, the resistance is only approximately 12 inches
from the joint centre. Now the difference is only 10 inches or 5 times
greater. Essentially, the weight was reduced by half.]{.mark}

[Many people performing side lateral raises with dumbbells do this
inadvertently by bending their elbow and bringing the weight closer to
the shoulder joint. Fitness professionals can use this principle as a
regression to exercises that are too demanding by reducing the torque
placed on the HMS or as a progression to increase the torque and place a
greater demand on the HMS.]{.mark}

TRY THIS

[Lie on your side with a weight wrapped around the ankle joint of your
top leg and abduct your thigh. Now, repeat with the weight wrapped
around your knee. Notice how much easier it was to abduct the hip when
moving the resistance closer to the centre of the moving joint (hip).
That is because moving the weight closer to the joint reduces the amount
of torque required.]{.mark}
