## Evidence of muscular dysfunction and increased injury

Skeletal muscle development and maintenance is vital to ensure optimal
health and well-being across the life span of all individuals. Skeletal
muscle tissue accounts for a significant amount of overall body mass and
supports freedom of movement within the environment. In addition to the
increased risk and occurrence of chronic diseases, too much sitting and
physical inactivity can also cause dysfunction in our body's muscular
and skeletal systems, which can lead to an increased risk of injury and
instances of low-back, shoulder, and neck pain.

**Foot and ankle dysfunction**

Foot and ankle injuries can severely limit and impact normal activities
of daily living. Two of the most common issues at the foot and ankle
complex include ankle sprains and plantar fasciitis. An ankle sprain
occurs when a person's ankle is rolled, twisted, or turned, which
results in the stretching or tearing of the ligaments that hold the
bones of the ankle together and connect it to the foot and the lower
leg. Plantar fasciitis involves inflammation of the tissue on the bottom
of the foot that connects the heel bone to the toes (i.e., the plantar
fascia) and often results in chronic heel pain.

The feet and ankles support the entire body; as a result, impairments to
the foot and ankle complex may cause dysfunction to other regions of the
body such as the knees, hips, or lower back. Additionally, if someone
has previously injured their ankle, there is a far greater risk of
injuring it again if work has not been done to properly condition it
back to a strong and stable place. This makes it highly important for
fitness professionals to monitor the posture of their clients' feet and
ankles during exercise so they can better develop proper movement
patterns.

**Knee dysfunction**

Knee pain is a common complaint that can affect anyone regardless of age
or level of physical activity. Possible causes of knee pain include
arthritis, acute (sudden onset) injuries, and overuse (repetitive)
injuries. Arguably, three of the most common knee injuries include
patellar tendonitis, anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tears, and medial
collateral ligament (MCL) tears. Some forms of chronic knee pain are
also associated with being overweight or obese and a lack of regular
physical activity.

It is important for fitness professionals to have a basic understanding
of proper knee alignment and posture, as well as ways to monitor
exercise technique to minimize the risk of injury. Many common types of
knee injuries and disorders can be prevented with proper exercise
technique, supportive footwear, and modifications to exercise and
physical activity as necessary. Regular flexibility and strength
training plans with the inclusion of a comprehensive warm-up component
can help significantly reduce the incidence of knee injuries.

**Lumbo-pelvic-hip complex dysfunction**

The lumbo-pelvic-hip complex (LPHC) is made up of the lumbar spine
(low-back area), pelvis, abdomen, and hip musculoskeletal structures and
is commonly referred to as "the core." The LPHC is an important
anatomical structure because it connects the upper and lower halves of a
person's body. Increasing strength and stability of the LPHC is
important for improvements in health, sports performance, and prevention
of injuries because an unstable core limits the ability of the limbs to
properly produce force and predisposes an individual to back or hip
pain. In fact, nearly 80% of adults experience some form of low-back
pain at least once during their lifetime. As such, fitness professionals
must have working knowledge of the muscles that make up the core and
design fitness programs that increase core stability and strength.

**Shoulder dysfunction**

Shoulder pain is a common occurrence, especially as the body ages.
Simple, routine movements, such as taking out the trash, getting
dressed, or reaching for something overhead, can often cause discomfort
when the shoulder joints are in a deconditioned state. Shoulder pain and
injuries are also quite common in sports and weight training, especially
during overhead lifting. Shoulder problems may be due to the instability
of the shoulder joint or impingement of the soft tissue or bony
structures of the shoulder, known as shoulder impingement syndrome.

Because so many functional movements involve the shoulders, fitness
professionals must have a working knowledge of their muscles and
structures. A regular routine of upper-body flexibility and properly
implemented strength training can help reduce the risk of shoulder
injuries. In addition, fitness professionals should ensure clients
perform high-intensity exercises correctly and only engage in training
programs that are suitable for their individual abilities, goals, and
objectives; for example, aggressive swinging pull-ups and hammer swing
exercises can be dangerous for individuals without advanced levels of
shoulder fitness already in place.

**Head and neck dysfunction**

Headaches and neck pain are common ailments, and poor posture of the
head and neck are often the cause. Much of the time, poor head and neck
posture is due to extended periods looking at computer screens or mobile
phones. For example, *text neck* is a growing phenomenon that
researchers are investigating to identify whether habitual use of cell
phones influences neck pain. Placing the head in a constant state of
flexion (looking downward) affects many of the muscles of the neck area
and may cause neck soreness.

Forward head posture is another common cause of head and neck pain.
Jutting the head forward increases the workload for many of the muscles
attached to the cervical spine (upper spine area), which has the job of
stabilizing the head. Over time, forward head posture can lead to
dysfunction of the neck area as the body tries to adapt and find
efficient ways to raise the head for straight-ahead vision. Forward head
posture can be seen in office workers and other individuals who
routinely work in front of a computer and naturally tend to migrate the
head toward the screen when trying to focus.

Exercise has been shown to be beneficial for individuals exhibiting
forward head posture, especially for the reduction of lingering neck
discomfort. Many people who seek the services of a fitness professional
are habitual mobile phone users or office workers who spend most of
their day working on a computer. Consequently, fitness professionals
should monitor the position of their clients' head and neck during
exercise to minimize the risk of injury and help train proper posture
and movement patterns.
