## Motor behaviour

[Motor behaviour is the HMS response to internal and external
environmental stimuli. The study of motor behaviour examines the manner
by which the nervous, skeletal, and muscular systems interact to produce
skilled movement using sensory information from internal and external
environments. Studying motor behaviour represents the collective study
of motor control, motor learning, and motor development.]{.mark}

[Motor control is the ability to initiate and correct purposeful
controlled movements and involves mechanisms used by the central nervous
system to assimilate and integrate sensory information with previous
experiences. Motor control is concerned with the central nervous system
structures that are involved with motor behaviour to produce
movement.]{.mark}

[Motor learning is the use of these processes through practice and
experience, leading to a relatively permanent change in one's capacity
to produce skilled movements. Anytime a new physical skill is learned
and practiced, motor learning is occurring.]{.mark}

[Motor development is then defined as the cumulative changes in motor
behaviour, over time, throughout the life span. Essentially,
individuals' motor development represents every physical ability they
have learned over their lifetime, from rolling over for the first time
as an infant to performing complex movements for athletic competition as
an adult and beyond.]{.mark}

**Motor control**

[To move in an organized and efficient manner, the HMS must exhibit
precise control over its collective segments. This segmental control is
an integrated process involving neural, skeletal, and muscular
components to produce appropriate motor responses. This process---and
the study of these movements---is known as motor control and focuses on
the involved structures and mechanisms used by the central nervous
system to integrate internal and external sensory information with
previous experiences to produce a skilled motor response.]{.mark}

[Motor control is concerned with the neural structures that are involved
with motor behaviour and how they produce movement. Essentially, motor
learning and development are required for an individual to have proper
motor control. Fitness professionals play a key role in the development
of their clients' motor control through proper instruction during
exercise and fitness endeavours.]{.mark}

**Muscle synergies**

[One of the most important concepts in motor control is that muscles are
recruited by the nervous system in groups, known as muscle synergies.
There is never a time where only one single muscle is activated alone.
This makes controlling movement more efficient by allowing muscles and
joints to operate as functional units.]{.mark}

[Muscle synergies represent the interworking relationship between
agonist and synergist muscle roles for a given movement pattern. Through
the practice of proper exercise technique and form, these synergies
become more fluent and automated.]{.mark}

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Exercise]{.mark}**   **[Muscle Synergies]{.mark}**
  ----------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
  [Squat]{.mark}          [Agonists: quadriceps, gluteus maximus\
                          Synergist: hamstrings complex\
                          Stabilizer: transverse abdominis]{.mark}

  [Shoulder press]{.mark} [Agonists: deltoids\
                          Synergist: triceps brachii\
                          Stabilizers: rotator cuff]{.mark}

  [Bench press]{.mark}    [Agonist: pectoralis major\
                          Synergists: triceps brachii, anterior deltoid\
                          Stabilizer: rotator cuff]{.mark}

  [Seated row]{.mark}     [Agonist: latissimus dorsi\
                          Synergists: posterior deltoid, biceps brachii\
                          Stabilizers: rotator cuff]{.mark}
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proprioception**

[Mechanoreceptors collectively feed the nervous system with a form of
sensory information known as proprioception. Proprioception uses
information from the mechanoreceptors (i.e., muscle spindles, Golgi
tendon organs, and joint receptors) to provide information about body
position, movement, and sensation as it pertains to muscle and joint
force. Proprioception is a vital source of information that the nervous
system uses to gather information about the environment to produce the
most efficient and precise movement.]{.mark}

[For example, proprioceptive input may provide a runner with a cue to
contract the ankle muscles to avoid an inversion injury. Research has
demonstrated that although proprioception may help prevent injury, it is
altered after injury. This means that many of today's health club
members may have altered proprioception as a result of past injuries.
This provides a rationale for the inclusion of both core and balance
training to enhance one's proprioceptive capabilities.]{.mark}

TRY THIS

[Sit in a chair with your eyes closed. Next, raise your right arm above
your head. Then, move your arm in a small circular motion five times.
Stop and open your eyes.]{.mark}

[How were you able to understand what your arm was doing? You couldn't
see, smell, taste, hear, or touch your right arm as it moved, but
somehow you were able to internally sense what your arm was doing. This
internal sensation is proprioception at work.]{.mark}

**Sensorimotor integration**

[Sensorimotor integration is the ability of the nervous system to gather
and interpret sensory information and to select and execute the proper
motor response. The definition implies that the nervous system
ultimately dictates movement. It is important to recognize that nervous
system function includes both central and peripheral nervous systems as
well as their integration with the musculotendinous structures and inert
tissues (ligament and capsule).]{.mark}

[For example, during an exercise, the muscle is activated and movement
occurs. Movement occurs as a result of neural input to the muscle from
the nervous system. Further to this point, the movement that occurs may
activate the muscle receptors as well as the receptors in the joint
itself, both providing feedback to the nervous system and influencing
movement.]{.mark}

[Sensorimotor integration is effective as long as the quality of
incoming sensory information is good. Individuals who train using
improper form will develop improper sensory information delivered to the
central nervous system, leading to movement compensations and potential
injury. It is, therefore, important to create properly designed exercise
programs and encourage clients to train with correct techniques at all
times. For example, if an individual consistently performs a chest press
while rounding and elevating the shoulders, it can lead to altered
length-tension relationships of muscles, altered force-couple
relationships, and altered arthrokinematics, ultimately leading to
shoulder injury.]{.mark}

**Motor learning**

[Motor learning is the integration of motor control processes, with
practice and experience, leading to a relatively permanent change in the
capacity to produce skilled movements. The study of motor learning looks
at how movements are learned and retained for future use. Motor learning
occurs when practicing to ride a bike, throw a baseball, play the piano,
and every other physical task the body can possibly learn to
perform.]{.mark}

[In all cases, proper practice and experience will lead to a permanent
change in one's ability to perform a movement efficiently. For a
movement to occur repeatedly, sensory information and sensorimotor
integration must be used to aid the HMS in the development of permanent
neural representations of motor patterns, a process referred to as
feedback. Essentially, the nervous system learns from repeated activity,
and newer movements often take more time to be refined or
mastered.]{.mark}

**Feedback**

[Feedback is the use of sensory information and sensorimotor integration
to aid the HMS in developing permanent neural representations of motor
patterns. Feedback allows for efficient movement, which is achieved
through two different forms of feedback: internal (or sensory) feedback
and external (or augmented) feedback.]{.mark}

[Internal feedback]{.underline}

[Internal feedback is the process whereby the body uses sensory
information to reactively monitor movement and the environment. It comes
primarily from internal biological structures (mechanoreceptors) in the
body relaying information via the autonomic nervous system. Internal
feedback acts as a guide, steering the HMS to the proper force, speed,
and amplitude of movement patterns for a given situation.]{.mark}

[It is important to instruct clients to use proper form when exercising
to ensure that the incoming sensory feedback is correct information,
allowing for optimal sensorimotor integration. For example, during a
hamstring stretch, the exerciser can feel when a stretch has reached a
tolerable limit and chooses to stop further movement to avoid
overstretching.]{.mark}

[External feedback]{.underline}

[External feedback refers to the information provided by an external
source, including a Certified Personal Trainer, video recording, mirror,
or heart rate monitor, to help supplement internal feedback to produce
more efficient motor learning. External feedback provides clients with
another source of information that allows them to associate whether the
achieved movement pattern was "good" or "bad" with what they are feeling
internally.]{.mark}

[Two major forms of external feedback are knowledge of results and
knowledge of performance. *Knowledge of results* is used after the
completion of a movement to help inform a client about the outcome of
the performance. Effective use and application of knowledge of results
involves both the fitness professional and the client's participation.
An example of knowledge of results is a fitness professional telling
clients that their squats looked "good" followed by asking the clients
whether they could "feel" or "see" their good form.]{.mark}

[By getting clients involved with the knowledge of results, they
increase their awareness and augment other forms of sensory feedback,
leading to more effective exercise technique. Knowledge of results can
be done after each repetition, after a few repetitions, or after the set
is completed. As clients become increasingly familiar with the desired
technique of a movement, knowledge of results from the fitness
professional can be offered less frequently. When knowledge of results
is implemented, it improves neuromuscular efficiency as well.]{.mark}

[*Knowledge of performance* provides information about the quality of
the movement during an exercise. An example would be noticing that a
client's feet were excessively externally rotated]{.mark}

[\
and the knees were adducting during a squat, and then asking the client
whether they felt or looked different during those repetitions.
Knowledge of performance gets the client involved in their own sensory
process. Knowledge of performance should be offered less frequently as
the client becomes more proficient.]{.mark}

[These forms of external feedback allow for the identification of
performance errors and help improve effective performance outcomes in
the future. They are also an important component of motivation.
Furthermore, they provide the client supplemental sensory input to help
create an awareness of the desired action. It is important that clients
not become dependent on external feedback, especially from a fitness
professional, because this may detract from their responsiveness to
internal sensory input or internal motivation. Excessive use of external
feedback can negatively affect sensorimotor integration and motor
learning and, ultimately, movement patterns.]{.mark}

## Introduction to exercise metabolism and bioenergetics

[The human body needs a constant supply of energy to function properly.
Those energy requirements can change, and exercise places unique demands
on the body's ability to supply energy. In addition to increasing energy
demand, exercise also requires the body to handle additional metabolic
by-products.]{.mark}

[The food we eat contains carbohydrates, proteins, and fats, which are
needed by our cells to produce energy and function properly. The energy
stored in these food sources, through a series of chemical reactions, is
converted to a high-energy compound called adenosine triphosphate (ATP),
which serves as the main form of energy in the human body. The role of
energy metabolism during exercise involves understanding how energy is
supplied, which energy systems are used during exercise, how quickly
energy can be supplied, and how cells generate ATP.]{.mark}

### Bioenergetics and metabolism

[Energy metabolism, or bioenergetics, is the study of how energy is
transformed through various biochemical reactions. Energy is required to
sustain life, support exercise, and pro­mote recovery from physical
activity or structured exercise. The term metabolism refers to all the
chemical reactions that occur in the body to maintain itself. As
mentioned earlier, the main sources of chemical energy for humans are
carbohydrates, fats, and protein. Exercise metabolism refers to the
examination of bioenergetics as it relates to the unique physiological
changes and demands placed on the body during exercise.]{.mark}

**Introduction to the law of thermodynamics**

[The body is an intact (i.e., closed) system. Like all other systems in
nature, the body must follow the first law of thermodynamics, which
states that energy can neither be created nor destroyed, only recycled
or converted from one form into another. In humans, this is referred to
as the concept of energy balance. Put briefly, the energy entering the
body in the form of macronutrients and coming out of the body is always
accounted for by changes in mass (i.e., a person's scale weight). If
someone consistently expends more energy than they consume, that person
will lose mass (weight). If someone consistently consumes more energy
than they expend, that person will gain mass (weight). Therefore, all of
the energy someone consumes is either used to perform bodily functions
or stored within the body (typically as body fat).]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[Carbon In -- Carbon Out]{.mark}

[All life on earth is carbon-based, meaning that carbon is the element
that primarily gives living things their physical mass. The "energy"
contained in food is located within the molecular bonds that connect
carbon and other elements in various ways to form carbohydrate, protein,
and fat molecules (i.e., the edible forms of organic matter). Other
elements in organic matter---such as oxygen, phosphorous, nitrogen, and
hydrogen--- have little to no contribution to physical mass. Water,
which does contribute to a living thing's *scale weight*, is contained
*within* the physical mass (i.e., inside cells and blood); it is not
part of it. When organic matter is consumed by an animal, molecular
bonds are broken and reformed numerous times during
metabolism---converting the source macronutrients into numerous
intermediate forms of organic matter---on the way to forming the ATP
molecules that muscles and organs use directly as their "energy
currency" to power function.]{.mark}

[Energy is stored in the human body in the same way it is contained
within food---in the molecular bonds of carbohydrate (glucose and
glycogen), fat (body fat), and protein (muscle and other soft tissues)
structures. Per the first law of thermodynamics, a body's mass increases
when it consumes more energy than it uses because that energy must be
physically contained within the molecular bonds of carbon-based organic
matter. Simply put, if energy isn't used, it is stored away for later,
and there can be no energy stored away for later without the
accompanying increase in carbon-based body mass to contain that
energy.]{.mark}

[Body mass is then lost in only one specific way. As metabolism works to
convert both food and bodily stores (i.e., glycogen and fat) to ATP for
use, carbon dioxide (CO2) is formed as the main waste product. Other
than physically removing tissue through surgery, exhaling CO2 is the
only way carbon is removed from the body. As the body exhales CO2, the
energy contained within the CO2's carbon-oxygen molecular bonds is
released back into the external environment where it is taken up by
plants and entered back into the greater food supply. Energy is never
created or destroyed; it is just transferred from one form of
carbon-based organic matter to another. In the human body's case, energy
starts as food, is then converted to various forms within the body
during metabolism, and is finally released back to the environment as
CO2 during exhalation.]{.mark}

**Fuel for energy metabolism**

[Dietary food provides energy to sustain life and support physical
activity, but not directly; it first must be broken down by the
digestive system into smaller by-products called substrates. Proteins
(more specifically, chains of amino acids), carbohydrates, and fats
constitute the main substrates used to transfer metabolic energy to be
used for all types of cellular activity and life. Since all energy
substrates are forms of organic matter, many can be converted from one
to the other within the body depending on what is needed. For example,
the body can convert carbohydrate-based foods to fat molecules in order
to store energy for later use. However, a small selection of substrates
cannot be created internally in this manner and must be consumed in the
diet. Those nutrients we must eat to live healthily are termed
*essential*.]{.mark}

**Glucose and glycogen**

[Glucose is one of the main sources of energy, particularly for brain
function and higher-intensity activity. Glucose can be made in the body
from other substrates (fats and amino acids), but a large majority of
our daily glucose needs come from consuming carbohydrate-based foods.
Carbohydrates are consumed and broken down into glucose through
digestion. Glucose is then absorbed and transported in the blood, where
it circulates until it enters cells and is either used to make ATP or is
stored for later. When it is stored, it is stored as string molecules in
a branched structure called glycogen. Glycogen is stored in the liver
and muscle cells and can be broken down rapidly to provide energy when
there is not enough free glucose in the blood.]{.mark}

[Glucose makes a relatively small contribution to overall energy
production during rest or low-intensity exercise. The brain always
requires glucose to function, but fats are what primarily fuel the body
when it is not active.]{.mark}

[As the intensity of an activity increases, the body transitions from
using mostly fat as fuel to using mostly glucose to provide energy. This
is because glucose can be used much faster than fat and can also be
metabolized without oxygen, whereas using fat for fuel always requires
oxygen.]{.mark}

[As activity intensity increases, the usage of carbohydrate as an energy
source becomes 50%, and the usage of fat becomes 50%. This metabolic
marker is referred to as ventilatory threshold 1 (VT1). This will be an
important concept to keep in mind during cardiorespiratory assessment
and programming, especially as it pertains to maximizing both fat loss
goals and performance goals for clients. As exercise intensity increases
further to maximal levels, ventilatory threshold 2 (VT2) is reached. VT2
represents the point where activity is so intense that glucose is
providing virtually all of the energy for the activity, as fats
metabolize too slowly to keep up with maximal demands. If the supplies
of glucose and glycogen run out, a person would not be able to continue
exercising at maximal intensity and he or she will have to reduce effort
to a point where fat usage is once again possible, commonly referred to
as hitting a wall. This is part of why some athletes use "energy gels"
and other carbohydrate supplements during prolonged strenuous training
and in competition.]{.mark}

**Free fatty acids**

[An equally important source of energy are fats, also known as lipids.
This energy source is particularly important during rest and
lower-intensity activity (i.e., below VT1). The chemical (or substrate)
form in which most fats exist in food (as well as in the body) is called
triglyceride. Triglycerides, more commonly referred to as free fatty
acids when they are in the blood stream, are derived directly from fats
contained in foods or are made by the body to store excess energy when
more food is consumed than is needed to support activity.]{.mark}

[Before cells can use consumed fat or stored body fat as a fuel source,
it first needs to be broken down into free fatty acids. Free fatty acids
are then used exclusively in the aerobic metabolic pathway to produce
ATP. One of the benefits of having fat as a fuel source is that even
relatively lean people still have a large supply stored on their body,
which can be broken down into triglycerides and used for energy during
prolonged, lower-intensity physical activity and exercise. Any time an
individual is exercising at an intensity below VT1, free fatty acids are
the primary fuel source.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[For conversion purposes, 1 lb (\~0.5 kg) of body fat equals around
3,500 calories of stored energy. For example, a lean 150 lb (\~68 kg)
person with 10% body fat would still have roughly 15 lb (\~6.8 kg) of
fat stored away throughout their body. That is roughly 52,500
calories!]{.mark}

**Amino acids**

[The third fuel source is protein, which is made up of long chains of
"building block" substances called amino acids. Humans use 20 different
amino acids to assemble bodily proteins. Of these 20 amino acids, nine
are called essential amino acids, which means that the body cannot
synthesize them on its own and they must be consumed in the
diet.]{.mark}

[The other 11 amino acids are called nonessential amino acids, which
means that they can be synthesized by the body (from consumed
carbohydrate or fat substrates) as long as overall nutrition intake is
adequate.]{.mark}

[When a person consumes protein, it is broken down into its component
amino acids. Those amino acid building blocks will then, ideally, be
used to synthesize human bodily proteins that build up muscle and repair
cellular machinery. However, the amino acids from dietary protein can
also supply energy for ATP production if carbohydrate and fat sources
are low. This situation should happen rarely to "spare protein," which
is why adequate carbohydrate intake is important, especially after
intense exercise; therefore, glycogen stores get replenished from the
carbohydrate source, and amino acids can fulfil their main postexercise
role: build and repair muscle.]{.mark}

[Protein rarely supplies much energy during exercise and, in many
descriptions, is ignored as a significant fuel source for energy
metabolism. During a negative energy balance, amino acids are used to
assist in energy production and can come from protein that was eaten or
from the breakdown of muscle tissue itself in extreme cases, like
starvation or when exercising at extremely high intensities for long
periods of time (for example, with Olympic marathon runners). Before
amino acids can be used to make ATP, they are further broken down and
then recombined into either glucose through a process called
gluconeogenesis or ketone bodies through a process called
ketogenesis.]{.mark}

**Ketone bodies**

[Ketone bodies is the name collectively used to refer to three
molecules---acetone, acetoacetic acid, and beta-hydroxybutyric
acid---that can be anaerobically metabolized similar to glucose. These
molecules are produced by the liver as a by-product of the breakdown of
fatty acids or through the conversion of ketogenic amino acids. The
human body does not have the ability to store these molecules, so they
are only used acutely to produce energy and are not stored for later
like glycogen. Even though the body does primarily run on free fatty
acids during low-intensity activity and rest, it still needs
carbohydrate substrates to properly function. So, when carbohydrate
stores run low, ketone bodies are produced and used alongside
gluconeogenic glucose to help make up for the deficiency. During this
metabolic state, the body is said to be in ketosis. Ketone levels can
increase in the human body in several ways:]{.mark}

- [By restricting overall calories to very low levels]{.mark}

- [By following very low-carbohydrate diets (e.g., ketogenic
  diet)]{.mark}

- [By consuming exogenous ketones]{.mark}

- [When there is a lack of insulin produced (type 1 diabetes) or
  substantial insulin resistance (type 2 diabetes).]{.mark}

[In most cases, when humans engage in the previous dietary habits 1--3,
their ketone levels can increase to approximately 0.5--1.5 millimoles
per litre (mmol/L) of blood, which is known as nutritional ketosis. This
is a different physiological state than what is known as ketoacidosis,
which mostly occurs in diabetic individuals. For most people, ketones
make up a small portion of the energy-producing substrates in the human
body, even in nutritional ketosis. However, there is some research
studying the effect of ketosis and ketone-producing diets, such as
ketogenic diets, for exercise performance.]{.mark}

### Energy and mechanical work

[To perform mechanical work, the body needs fuel, which is broken down
through a series of chemical reactions to provide energy. Recall the
first law of thermodynamics and how energy cannot be created or
destroyed. The only way new energy enters the earth's ecosystem is from
the sun. Plants convert the sun's energy to food and food provides
animals (including humans) with energy to perform cellular and
mechanical functions. Essentially, the human body is an organic machine
that can turn chemical energy into mechanical work. Interestingly, about
40% of the energy released during metabolism is actually used for
cellular work, such as a cell creating more molecules; the remainder is
released as heat. This is analogous to a car engine that uses gasoline
(a chemical) to produce work and heat.]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[ATP for the body is like gasoline for a car, in that it is the specific
fuel substrate that burns best in the engine. The food we eat is like
crude oil; it contains all the necessary chemical energy, but it must be
processed into a form that our "engines" (mitochondria in cells) can
use. Metabolism essentially represents the body's internal "oil
refinery." It processes the "crude" input (i.e., macronutrients) into
something that can be specifically used by the cells for fuel (i.e.,
ATP).]{.mark}

**Energy systems**

[Adenosine triphosphate is the primary energy-providing molecule in the
human body. It is a complex molecule made up of a nitrogenous base
(adenine), a sugar molecule (ribose), and three phosphate groups.
Specifically, the energy that the body gets from ATP is stored in the
chemical bonds that hold the three phosphates together. When these
chemical bonds are broken, energy from one of the phosphates is released
for mechanical work (such as performing muscle contraction), leaving
behind another molecule called adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and an extra
phosphate.]{.mark}

[ADP is then left free in the cell, waiting to be converted back to ATP
when enough energy substrates from food or bodily stores are available.
Even though it takes numerous complicated physiological processes and
chemical reactions to get there, all the useable energy from the food we
eat and from stores in the body has the same end goal of making more
available ATP.]{.mark}

[The human body has several ways to generate ATP from ADP, which is a
process called phosphorylation. The three main ways that phosphorylation
is reached are known as the three metabolic pathways:]{.mark}

1.  [ATP-PC system]{.mark}

2.  [Glycolytic system (glycolysis)]{.mark}

3.  [Oxidative system (oxidative phosphorylation)]{.mark}

[Depending on the intensity of an activity, each of the systems will
shift in priority as to which is primarily supplying ATP; however, there
is rarely a time where only one or another is active by itself. All
three systems work together to fulfil the body's total energy demand.
The energy systems do not turn on and off in a linear fashion; rather,
they operate more like dimmer switches. As the intensity of activity
changes, the energy systems dynamically adjust in relation to one
another to ensure energy needs are met. Even though one energy system
might be contributing more than the others given a specific intensity of
activity, the other two are still contributing in the background in some
fashion.]{.mark}

[This is best shown when looking at a graph of how the energy systems
respond when the body is asked to perform a maximally intense activity
for a long duration, such as running a few laps around a track at the
fastest pace possible (hypothetically assuming the same maximal pace can
be maintained for a few minutes). Recall that at rest and during
low-intensity activity, free fatty acids provide most of the energy via
the oxidative system. Then, when intensity increases (e.g., going from a
standstill to an all-out sprint), the oxidative system cannot keep up,
and the anaerobic processes kick into gear.]{.mark}

[For the first 10--15 seconds, as the body transitions from low to high
intensity, the ATP-PC system provides the most energy. As the ATP-PC
begins to exhaust and taper off, glycolysis is already ramping up to
take over the majority of the energy production duties, which it can
support for around 2 minutes. And all the while, the oxidative system is
ramping up, contributing greater and greater amounts until it eventually
becomes the primary source of ATP production. The better a person's
cardiorespiratory fitness is, the more efficiently the oxidative system
can support higher levels of intensity without having to rely as heavily
on anaerobic processes.]{.mark}

[When intensity continues long enough that the oxidative system can no
longer support the activity, there is no other option but to slow down,
rest, and recover (i.e., the point beyond VT2 commonly known as hitting
a wall).]{.mark}

[]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[The contribution of all three energy systems must always add up to
100%. There is never a time where one is completely "turned off." Even
when the oxidative system is primarily supplying energy for a
long-lasting intense activity, the other systems are working to
replenish so they can again support increased bursts of intensity when
needed.]{.mark}

**ATP-PC**

[The first of the ATP-generating metabolic pathways is known as the
ATP-PC system, or the phosphagen or the phosphocreatine system. The body
naturally creates stores of phosphocreatine by breaking down and
converting certain amino acids. This system is the simplest and fastest
way to generate more ATP. Essentially, it works by taking ADP left over
from a previous muscle contraction and adds a phosphate taken from a
phosphocreatine (PC) molecule, rapidly creating available ATP at the
site where it needs to be used. This process does not require oxygen,
which is why the ATP-PC energy pathway is considered anaerobic.]{.mark}

[The ATP-PC system provides energy for primarily high-intensity,
short-duration bouts of activity. This can be seen in strength and power
forms of training in which very heavy loads are used with only a few
repetitions or during short sprinting efforts. When activity rapidly
intensifies, the small amounts of free ATP in the muscle tissue and the
ATP-PC system can supply energy for only 10 to 15 seconds before running
out. This system is activated at the onset of any increase in activity
intensity because of its ability to produce energy very rapidly in
comparison with the other systems. However, PC stores run out faster
than they can be replenished, at which point other methods of ATP
production must pick up the slack.]{.mark}

**Glycolysis**

[As PC stores begin to exhaust, a slightly slower (but still relatively
rapid) anaerobic energy system is ramping up. This is the first step in
the chemical breakdown of glucose in a process referred to as
glycolysis. The process of glycolysis turns free blood glucose or stored
glycogen into pyruvate and ATP. Glycolysis takes place in the cytoplasm
of an animal cell. This anaerobically created ATP can then be used
directly the same way as the ATP created by the ATP-PC system. This
system can produce a significantly greater amount of energy than the
ATP-PC system, but it is a bit slower to ramp up to its full ATP
production capabilities. However, it lasts longer, with a capacity of
approximately 30 to 60 seconds of duration, which can be increased by
several seconds through the use of high-intensity styles of
training.]{.mark}

[Most people have enough free glucose in the blood and stored glycogen
to fuel anaerobic glycolysis for many repeated bursts, such as a sprint
workout or a session of high-intensity interval training. However, for
most people, those carbohydrate sources run out after around 1 hour of
sustained activity, which is why carbohydrate drinks or gels are helpful
to keep the body performing at its best when an event lasts longer than
60 minutes.]{.mark}

[Glycolysis is directly linked with the oxidative system by the pyruvate
by-product that is created. It can be treated in two different ways
depending on whether or not there is oxygen present. If there is oxygen
available, the pyruvate is further broken down, enters the oxidative
system, and leads to the creation of additional ATP. If oxygen cannot be
delivered fast enough, the pyruvate will be converted into a molecule
called lactate, which contributes to the "burn" felt during strenuous
exercise as it accumulates in muscle tissue (the accumulation of CO2 in
muscle tissue at a rate faster than it can be removed also factors into
the burning feeling).]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[What Is Lactic Acid?]{.mark}

[During periods of high-intensity exercise, ATP is needed faster than
oxygen can be delivered by the cardiorespiratory system. Therefore, the
body relies mostly on the ATP-PC system and glycolysis for energy when
intensities push toward maximal levels. As pyruvate accumulates in an
anaerobic environment, it is quickly converted to lactate, releasing a
free hydrogen ion in the process.]{.mark}

[These hydrogen ions contribute to a decrease in muscle pH, which is
known as acidosis. This acidosis can lead to some of the feelings of
pain and fatigue associated with intense exercise because the hydrogen
ions that lower pH can interfere with muscle contraction. Because of
this, tissue pH shifts toward becoming acidic; the lactate and hydrogen
ions produced during anaerobic glycolysis are often collectively termed
*lactic acid*.]{.mark}

[However, lactate is not a true "waste product" in the same way as CO2.
Once it has been removed from soft tissue cells and enters the
bloodstream, instead of being removed from the body, it is processed by
the liver in a separate metabolic process called the Cori cycle. During
the Cori cycle, ATP is used to convert lactate in the opposite direction
back to pyruvate and subsequently glucose (Cori & Cori, 1929). This
glucose is then released back into the bloodstream to be used again.
Because of this, the Cori cycle is highly important in helping keep the
body's pH balanced.]{.mark}

**The oxidative system**

[The most complex of the three energy systems is the oxidative
system---a process that uses oxygen to convert food substrates into ATP.
This process is called oxidative phosphorylation, and it is defined as
an aerobic process because it needs oxygen to complete the reactions.
There are three substrates that are used in the oxidative system: free
fatty acids, the pyruvate created during glycolysis, and amino acids
that have undergone deamination.]{.mark}

[Oxidative phosphorylation uses a series of chemical reactions leading
to the end result of creating ATP and carbon dioxide. This pathway
includes two sets of reactions. Both sets occur in cellular organelles
called the mitochondria. The first set of reactions is called the citric
acid cycle (CAC), also known as the Krebs cycle, which leads to the
creation of a few ATP molecules and the waste product of carbon dioxide.
During this stage, electrons are freed for use in the next set of
reactions known as the electron transport chain (ETC), which uses those
electrons to drive a complex series of reactions that create the most
ATP.]{.mark}

[The oxidative system is what the body primarily relies on for the
majority of low- to moderate-intensity activity. While anaerobic
processes last anywhere from a few seconds to a few minutes, aerobic
metabolism can sustain the body indefinitely, just at increasingly lower
intensity levels. As a person's cardiorespiratory fitness improves
(i.e., the ability to deliver oxygen to the cells), so does the
oxidative energy system's ability to support higher intensity levels
without having to preferentially activate the anaerobic
processes.]{.mark}

**Oxidative metabolism of different macronutrients**

[Whether carbohydrate, fat, or protein substrates are being used, they
all must be broken down to the same substance, called acetyl coenzyme A
(acetyl CoA), before they can enter the CAC. Acetyl CoA provides a
common starting point for the enzymes used in the CAC, which removes the
electrons from this molecule and transports the negatively charged
electrons along with positively charged hydrogen ions to the ETC. These
electrons and hydrogens are stored inside the mitochondria and then used
to provide the energy that converts ADP into ATP.]{.mark}

[To use fat substrates for aerobic energy production, the fat (e.g.,
triglycerides) must first be converted into free fatty acids and then
further broken down to acetyl CoA in a process called beta-oxidation.
Fat molecules are large, energy dense, and more complex than
carbohydrates, which is why fat metabolism is slower and cannot keep up
with high-intensity energy demands. Even though fat oxidation is slow,
one fatty acid molecule can net significantly more ATP than glucose. For
example, when one molecule of the fatty acid palmitate is fully
metabolized, it yields 129 ATP.]{.mark}

[Unlike the initial anaerobic metabolism of glucose, using fat as an
energy source always requires oxygen. The rate at which a person can
break down fat depends on the number of mitochondria in the muscle cell
and the amount of oxygen delivered by the blood. Athletes and
well-conditioned people tend to have more mitochondria in their muscle
cells than sedentary individuals and are therefore better at breaking
down fat.]{.mark}

[Finally, if there is a lot of carbohydrate (glucose) available, the
body will use some of that instead, which will decrease the total amount
of fat used to make ATP.]{.mark}

[If oxidative phosphorylation is starting from a carbohydrate food
source, it must first be broken down into glucose and then converted to
pyruvate through glycolysis. Essentially, not only is glycolysis its own
anaerobic energy system, but it is also the first step in the aerobic
metabolism of glucose. When there is enough oxygen present, pyruvate is
not converted to lactate. Instead, it is further broken down to acetyl
CoA and enters the CAC. The complete metabolism (anaerobic and aerobic)
of a single glucose molecule produces between 35 and 40 ATP.
Additionally, if both carbohydrates and fats are depleted to the point
that amino acids are being relied on directly for energy (e.g., during
extreme starvation), they are also broken down and metabolized
aerobically.]{.mark}

[]{.mark}GETTING TECHNICAL

[Amino acids are very rarely deaminated and converted to acetyl CoA
directly for oxidative phosphorylation. Most of the time, when amino
acids are called on as an energy source, they are first converted to
glucose or ketone bodies via gluconeogenesis and ketogenesis. Those
converted substrates then enter their respective carbohydrate- or
fat-based metabolic pathways.]{.mark}

#### 

#### Electron transport chain

[The ETC is a vastly complex process that occurs in the inner
mitochondrial membrane after the CAC has removed the electrons from
acetyl CoA. In this process, protein complexes create a gradient of
stored hydrogen ions that allow the electrons freed by the CAC to move
through them. When ATP levels fall and ADP levels rise, the hydrogen
gradient is "harvested" by a protein called ATP synthase to turn ADP and
oxygen into ATP and water. As a result of this efficient handling of the
molecules, the ETC can generate a relatively large amount of ATP with
minimal waste products.]{.mark}

**Energy during exercise**

[Any form of exercise can be defined by two factors: intensity and
duration. These key factors are inversely related, meaning that as
intensity goes up, duration must go down. Lifting weights for very a
short duration with a high intensity is illustrated at point A, running
400 meters is shown at point B, while distance running for a long
duration at a lower intensity is at point C. Essentially, the more
intense the effort, the shorter the possible duration of the activity
will be. Identifying where an exercise is located within this
relationship helps define the exercise's predominate energy
system.]{.mark}

[At higher intensities (above VT1), carbohydrates will provide more of
the energy to make ATP compared to fat because carbohydrates (glucose)
can be broken down quickly via glycolysis. Lower-intensity activities
(below VT1) will rely mostly on fat oxidation to provide ATP. As the
exercise intensity increases to levels over VT1, the body will
dynamically shift to relying more on blood glucose and stored glycogen.
Then, at any point in an activity when a quick burst of energy is
needed, the ATP-PC system will provide a large contribution for the
short, intense effort. Essentially, all three systems are in a constant
state of flux, readily adapting to meet 100% of the body's energy needs
for the entire range of activity intensities.]{.mark}

**Metabolism during steady-state exercise**

[The bioenergetics of exercise can be indirectly measured in a
laboratory using various modes of exercise (e.g., treadmill or cycle
ergometer). Other physiologic functions can be measured as well,
including heart rate, blood pressure, and exercise load or work output.
Measurements made for the purpose of assessing exercise metabolism are
typically made during periods of steady-state. Steady-state aerobic
exercise, as the term suggests, is aerobic exercise performed at a
constant pace (intensity). For example, steady-state exercise could be
described as walking or jogging at a consistent pace for 1 mile.]{.mark}

[It begins with a person straddling a treadmill belt set at a steady
light jogging pace. At the start of exercise (i.e., when the person
jumps on the belt and goes from no activity to jogging), aerobic
metabolic pathways are too slow to meet the initial demands, so the body
relies on the ATP-PC cycle and glycolysis to make up the demand, known
as an O2 deficit.]{.mark}

[Gradually, the rate of aerobic ATP production increases, and less and
less energy needs to be derived from anaerobic sources. At this point a
few minutes into the steady-state effort, oxidative metabolic processes
are able to catch up and take over most ATP production duties. Once that
point has been reached, the energy demand of the exercise is being met
through aerobic means. That primarily aerobic state would essentially
continue indefinitely, limited only by the exerciser's muscular
endurance and fitness level.]{.mark}

[Then, when the person in the example steps off the treadmill, the
energy demands start falling back to baseline quickly and then more
slowly, but the oxygen consumption remains elevated for a few minutes to
keep generating ATP aerobically. This shaded area is often referred to
as excess postexercise oxygen consumption, or EPOC. The purpose of EPOC
is to produce additional ATP (above and beyond what is needed for
recovery) to help reestablish baseline levels of ATP and PC and to
assist with clearing metabolic waste products. Once the ATP and PC
levels have been restored and other physiologic processes have returned
to normal, oxygen consumption will have returned close to baseline, and
immediate recovery will be mostly complete.]{.mark}

**Metabolism during intermittent work**

[During intermittent exercise, this same energy production pattern as
steady-state exercise occurs, just multiple times across a workout with
each change in intensity. When an exerciser has to increase intensity,
most of the energy needs come from anaerobic metabolism. When intensity
is decreased, there is a continued period of high, but briefly elevated,
oxygen consumption in an attempt to recover quickly to be ready for the
next bout of higher-intensity work. Essentially, intermittent work
cycles create repeated periods of EPOC without allowing the aerobic
processes to fully take over.]{.mark}

[If the prior bout of high-intensity work is less than 1 minute, meaning
it was primarily fuelled by the ATP-PC system, the recovery period will
also be about 1 minute or slightly less. If the period of high-intensity
work is longer, such as in repeated interval training, the recovery
period should have a similar 1-to-1 ratio of work-to-rest time. Recovery
is an aerobic event to set ATP-PC concentrations back toward normal and
eliminate metabolic waste products. Therefore, even though interval
training workouts and athletic competitions are quite often not
steady-state efforts, participants really do need to have periods of
training that address improving aerobic energy production to perform and
recover optimally.]{.mark}

**Estimating fuel contribution during activity**

[At lower intensities, the body is using primarily fat for fuel, which
results in a lot of ATP being produced, some oxygen being used, and
relatively less carbon dioxide being produced. As the exercise intensity
increases, the rate at which ATP needs to be produced increases, so more
oxygen needs to be delivered to the mitochondria. This causes an
increase in breathing volume (i.e., the length and depth of breaths) and
is a hallmark of reaching VT1. However, as exercise intensity continues
to increase, aerobic metabolism of fat cannot be used to create ATP fast
enough, so the body shifts to relying on glucose for fuel via
glycolysis.]{.mark}

[This change in fuel source also means that more carbon dioxide will be
produced, which needs to be exhaled. As a result, breathing rate must
increase, not only to deliver more oxygen but now also to exhale the
increasing amounts of carbon dioxide being produced. This point, where
breathing becomes rapid enough that talking is extremely difficult to
impossible, marks VT2.]{.mark}

[In summary, at VT1, a person needs to take in more air to supply more
oxygen to the mitochondria to help support the oxidative metabolism of
free fatty acids. Then, at VT2, a person is relying primarily on
anaerobic metabolism, and the body becomes more focused on exhaling
carbon dioxide and trying to recover anaerobically, so expiration
becomes more forceful making it difficult to talk. Because of this,
fitness professionals can use a "talk test" to help determine if a
client is working aerobically or anaerobically.]{.mark}

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       **[ATP-PC]{.mark}**   **[Glycolysis]{.mark}**   **[Oxidative]{.mark}**
  -------------------- --------------------- ------------------------- ------------------------
  [Fuel                [Phosphocreatine      [Stored glycogen and/or   [Pyruvate and free fatty
  Substrate]{.mark}    (PC)]{.mark}          blood glucose]{.mark}     acids]{.mark}

  [Intensity           [High]{.mark}         [Moderate to high]{.mark} [Low to moderate]{.mark}
  Supported]{.mark}                                                    

  [Onset of Maximal    [1 sec]{.mark}        [5-10 sec]{.mark}         [2-3 min]{.mark}
  ATP                                                                  
  Production]{.mark}                                                   

  [Time to Exhaustion  [10-15 sec]{.mark}    [30-60 sec]{.mark}        [Theoretically
  of the                                                               unlimited]{.mark}
  System]{.mark}                                                       

  [Ultimate Limiting   [Depletion of ATP-PC  [Lactate and CO2          [Insufficient oxygen,
  Factor(s)]{.mark}    stores]{.mark}        accumulation]{.mark}      heat accumulation,
                                                                       muscle fatigue]{.mark}
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The myth of the "fat-burning zone"**

[There is another way of thinking about exercise intensity that has been
misinterpreted: the concept of the so-called fat-burning zone. The
thought is that people burn more fat at lower-intensity exercise because
that easy work relies primarily on the oxidation of free fatty acids and
does not require getting energy quickly from carbohydrates. Although it
is true that lower-intensity activity relies more on fat as a fuel
substrate than glucose, the end result is a little more complex and
needs to be viewed from the perspective of a full 24-hour day.]{.mark}

[When considering fat burning, it is important to think of both the
intensity of an activity and the total duration of that activity.
Lower-intensity activities do use a higher percentage of fat as a fuel,
but they do not burn a lot of calories unless performed for a very long
time. However, while moderate- and high-intensity activities might have
a higher percentage of energy coming from carbohydrates, they are
burning more total calories in a given time. The exerciser burned a
higher percentage of fat (70%) when performing low-intensity work as
compared to moderate-intensity exercise (50%). However, the *total*
number of fat calories was greater when exercising at a
moderate-intensity (60 calories) versus low-intensity exercise (42
calories).]{.mark}

[This means that when weight loss is the goal, the average individual
with only 1 hour of time per day to exercise will see better results
with a moderate- to higher-intensity type of workout. He or she will
burn more calories during the higher-intensity workout, which will
contribute to a greater number of total daily calories burned. On the
other hand, if an individual has the ability to do so, lower-intensity
activity performed for many hours at a time---such as very long hikes
out in nature---would, in fact, net a greater fat burn than 60 minutes
of interval training performed by someone who otherwise sits at a desk
all day.]{.mark}

[]{.mark}

+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| **[Example         | **[Fat Calories    | **[Carbohydrate    | **[Total Calories  |
| Exercise           | Expended]{.mark}** | Calories           | Expended]{.mark}** |
| Programs]{.mark}** |                    | Expended]{.mark}** |                    |
|                    |                    |                    | []{.mark}          |
+:===================+:===================+:===================+:===================+
| [20 minutes, low   | [42 (70%)]{.mark}  | [18 (30%)]{.mark}  | [60]{.mark}        |
| intensity]{.mark}  |                    |                    |                    |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| [20 minutes,       | [60 (50%)]{.mark}  | [60 (50%)]{.mark}  | [120]{.mark}       |
| moderate           |                    |                    |                    |
| intensity]{.mark}  |                    |                    |                    |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

### Daily energy needs

[When daily food intake is matched to energy needs, people are said to
be in energy balance, which allows them to maintain a stable body
weight. However, when energy intake is higher than needed to support the
total daily energy requirements, it can lead to an increase in body
weight. Similarly, if individuals eat less than they need to support
their daily energy requirements, they will lose weight as the body fuels
itself from its internal stores. Individuals who are over their ideal
weight will need to either decrease daily energy intake and/or increase
daily activity to achieve their ideal weight. Conversely, people who
want to gain muscle mass need to increase their daily energy intake
beyond what is being used. The amount of daily energy individuals need
is also impacted by their age, sex, pregnancy, existing muscle mass,
hormone function, medication use, and genetic factors. As a result,
individual daily energy needs vary tremendously across the
population.]{.mark}

**Total Daily Energy Expenditure**

[The total number of calories that a person expends in a day is called
the total daily energy expenditure (TDEE). Calories are the basic unit
of energy that is provided by food. Scientifically speaking, 1 Calorie
(also referred to as a kilocalorie (kcal)) is the amount of energy
needed to raise the temperature of 1 kilogram of water by 1º Celsius.
But more importantly from a health and fitness perspective, calories (as
commonly written on food labels) represent the units of energy that come
from the food we use to stay alive, maintain body functions, move, and
exercise.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[A calorie (lowercase c) is a unit of energy and is defined as the
amount of heat energy required to raise the temperature of 1 gram of
water 1º Celsius. A kilocalorie (kcal, sometimes written as Calorie with
an uppercase C) is equal to 1,000 calories. Although not scientifically
correct, calories (as written on food labels) and kilocalories are used
interchangeably in everyday language all around the world; however, food
calories are technically kilocalories.]{.mark}

[The number of calories that each person expends in a day varies
tremendously. The calories that are burned throughout the day are used
for a variety of processes besides exercise, including maintenance of
the resting metabolic rate (RMR), digestion and absorption of food, and
general activities ranging from walking to the mailbox to typing on a
keyboard. Because heat is a by-product of processing macronutrient
substrates for energy, the "burning of calories" is more specifically
termed *thermogenesis*. With that in mind, energy used for exercise is
called exercise activity thermogenesis (EAT), energy used to digest food
is called the thermic effect of food (TEF), and energy used for all the
other daily movements and activities a person performs is called
nonexercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT). The combination of RMR, EAT,
TEF, and NEAT combine to form TDEE.]{.mark}

**Resting metabolic rate**

[The RMR is the number of calories that the body uses at complete rest
to function (e.g., pumping blood, breathing, fuelling the brain, organ
functioning). Simply put, RMR is the minimum energy expenditure (i.e.,
number of calories needed) to keep a person alive. This number can vary
considerably among individuals, but people with more muscle mass tend to
have a higher RMR because muscle is a more active user of ATP than other
bodily tissues. RMR accounts for around 70% of TDEE, with activity
(EAT + NEAT) and TEF making up the remainder of the daily energy
expenditure.]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[One of the best methods to measure RMR is via indirect calorimetry, a
process that uses expired gasses (CO2) to predict energy expenditure.
However, the equipment to do this is not widely available, so there are
several equations that can be used to estimate RMR, including the
Harris-Benedict, Miflin St. Jeor, and Katch-McArdle methods. There are
also many online calculators that have been developed that incorporate
one or more prediction equations in an attempt to improve the
accuracy.]{.mark}

[However, when compared to measuring RMR through indirect calorimetry,
all prediction equations tend to underestimate RMR, especially for
muscular people and clinical populations. Also, prediction equations to
determine RMR work poorly in people with obesity, so caution should be
used when estimating RMR via a prediction equation when working with
obese clients.]{.mark}

**Thermic effect of food**

[TEF is the number of calories that are expended to break down the
components of a meal. In other words, it takes energy (calories) to
digest food. On average, around 7--10% of the calories contained in
foods go toward their own digestion and absorption. In general, protein
results in a higher TEF, meaning it takes more calories to break down
protein foods compared to carbohydrates or fats.]{.mark}

**Energy expended during physical activity**

[While most of the energy (calories) that a person burns during the day
is due to the basic metabolic processes that sustain life, any type of
activity or exercise also burns calories and therefore raises TDEE.
Physical activity can be broken down into two categories: structured,
purposeful exercise (EAT) and nonexercise activities (NEAT), such as
cleaning the house or shopping for groceries. Exercise can increase
energy expenditure both during the activity itself and afterward via
increased metabolic rate and recovery processes.]{.mark}

[The utilization of 1 litre of oxygen during aerobic activity requires 5
kcal (calories) of energy, so longer-duration or higher-intensity
aerobic activities can burn a considerable number of calories. The
physical activity level (PAL) has been quantified as the total daily
energy expenditure divided by the resting energy expenditure. The
physical activity level quantifies a person's activity level by
comparing the number of calories burned while active to the amount
burned while sedentary. Some evidence suggests that the ideal physical
activity level ratio for a sustainable lifestyle ranges from 1:1--2:5,
which peaks during reproductive age and declines somewhat later in
life.]{.mark}

[]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[Another way that activity is sometimes quantified is by metabolic
equivalent (MET). One MET is equal to 3.5 mL of oxygen consumed per
kilogram of body weight per minute (3.5 mL O2/kg per min), which is the
average resting metabolic rate for the greater population. A
moderate-intensity activity might require 5 METs (5 times RMR, or 17--18
mL/kg per min), and a very high-intensity activity might require 9 or
more METs (9 times RMR or \>30 mL/kg per min).]{.mark}

**Nonexercise activity thermogenesis**

[NEAT refers to the burning of calories from activity that occurs
independent of structured, planned exercise. Factors like standing
instead of sitting, fidgeting, shivering, and daily tasks, such as
walking to the parking lot and doing household chores, are all
components of NEAT. NEAT levels can vary tremendously across populations
and may contribute up to 20% of TDEE in people who have nonsedentary
jobs (e.g., manual labour). Some research has suggested that certain
individuals have greater inherent tendency to perform NEAT---such as
people who fidget more---and that higher levels of daily NEAT may be
protective against obesity. While some people may be more predisposed to
unconsciously engage in NEAT than others, anyone can choose to
incorporate more NEAT into their day by including things like using a
standing desk, parking farther away in the parking lot, pacing while on
the phone, and taking the stairs instead of the elevator.]{.mark}
