# Assessments

[Structured exercises and physical activities are known to reduce an
individual's risk for mortality and morbidity, while also providing many
physiological, emotional, and cognitive benefits. While
light-to-moderate intensities of exercise, such as walking or jogging,
are generally considered safe for much of the population,
higher-intensity activities in certain individuals may hold inherent
risk of harm. For example, high-intensity interval training (HIIT) is a
popular exercise format, but because of the more intense nature of the
type of exercise, it might not be suitable at the outset for individuals
who are deconditioned or those who have health concerns like high blood
pressure or cardiovascular disease. Therefore, all new exercisers should
be appropriately screened using some form of a health risk assessment
(HRA) prior to initiating an exercise program to evaluate the benefits
versus the risks of starting a program. An HRA is conducted to evaluate
the safety of an individual participating in exercise. It differs from a
fitness assessment, which measures physical parameters of fitness like
aerobic capacity or body composition. Furthermore, fitness assessments
can include both subjective and objective measures. Subjective measures
reflect what the individual feels, experiences, or reports (e.g., low
energy, back discomfort, headaches), whereas objective measures are
quantified through the collection of data (blood pressure, heart rate,
body fat percentage, etc.). Although both can be viewed as important,
the collection of objective data is necessary to determine risk while
quantifying any baseline or starting measures.]{.mark}

[Although the general purposes of conducting physiological assessments
are to collect baseline data to help fitness professionals develop
personalized exercise programs, they serve many other important
roles:]{.mark}

- [Identifying individuals who are at increased risk for any
  cardiovascular, pulmonary, or metabolic diseases, or their signs or
  symptoms, and should first undergo more thorough medical
  evaluations]{.mark}

- [Identifying individuals with medical contraindications who should be
  excluded from exercise until conditions have been corrected or are
  under control]{.mark}

- [Identifying those individuals with medical contraindications who
  should participate in medically supervised programs]{.mark}

- [Reducing the need for unwarranted medical evaluations prior to
  partaking in an exercise program for apparently healthy adults]{.mark}

- [Providing appropriate recommendations regarding initiation or
  continuation of exercise or physical activity]{.mark}

- [Educating individuals about their current physical condition]{.mark}

- [Enabling effective program evaluation (i.e., tracking progress) using
  baseline and follow-up data]{.mark}

- [Using the information to motivate individuals through realistic goal
  setting.]{.mark}

## Preparticipation screening

[As indicated previously, it is necessary to always screen an individual
with an HRA prior to starting any exercise regimen that involves
exertion. This screening should take place prior to participation in any
strenuous fitness assessments or exercise.]{.mark}

**The Health Risk Assessment**

[Questionnaires are used to collect information regarding existing risk
factors for participation in exercise and physical activity to determine
the need for medical clearance beforehand. This is a vital, first step
in the preparticipation screening process, but this screening procedure
should always be valid, simple, and cost and time efficient, and it
should also be appropriate for the target population. Remember, new
exercisers may be apprehensive, both about starting exercise and the use
of a long, overly detailed and time-consuming HRA, which might increase
their anxieties associated with moving forward.]{.mark}

**Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire (PAR-Q+)**

[The Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire (PAR-Q+) was developed in
2011, and updated in 2019, as an attempt to simplify the
preparticipation screening and remove some of the unnecessary barriers
for individuals seeking to adopt active behaviours, such as excessive
and unnecessary doctor referrals. It is a questionnaire given to
prospective clients to gain insight into their current health and
wellness.]{.mark}

[The PAR-Q+ and preparticipation process reflects these health
indicators:]{.mark}

- [An individual's current level of physical activity]{.mark}

- [Presence of signs or symptoms and/or known cardiovascular, pulmonary
  (respiratory), renal (kidney), or metabolic disease (e.g.,
  diabetes)]{.mark}

- [Desired exercise intensity (light, moderate, vigorous).]{.mark}

[CRITICAL]{.mark}

[Fitness professionals should continue to consult with medical
professionals for any questions pertaining to disease or signs and
symptoms found in their client's PAR-Q+.]{.mark}

[The criteria also provide general recommendations for medical clearance
rather than a specific need for medical exams. This allows for greater
discretion to the Certified Personal Trainer in the decision-making
process, because exercise testing is not a uniformly recommended
screening process for all individuals initiating an exercise
program.]{.mark}

[Part one of the questionnaire consists of seven questions. If the
client answers no to all seven questions, then the survey is considered
complete. However, if the client answers yes to any of the initial seven
questions, they must complete part two of the survey.]{.mark}

[CRITICAL]{.mark}

[The PAR-Q+ has always been recognized as a minimal yet safe
pre-exercise screening measure for low-to-moderate, but not vigorous,
exercise training. While the seven questions are simple to administer,
its simplicity was also problematic as it offered little opportunity for
interpretation of the questions asked. Unfortunately, this resulted in
far too many individuals not being cleared for participation and being
referred unnecessarily to their doctors for medical clearance. For
example, an individual diagnosed with any pulmonary diseases (e.g.,
asthma) was automatically referred to their medical provider for
clearance before initiating an exercise or physical activity program. In
reality, these diseases do not appear to increase the risks of fatal or
nonfatal cardiovascular complications during or immediately following
exercise.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[The current PAR-Q+ includes additional follow-up questions to better
guide participation recommendations that were not part of the original
PAR-Q for individuals who indicated yes on one or more questions. These
questions aim to reduce false-positive screenings, reduce barriers to
exercise initiation, and help customize pre-exercise recommendations
based on relevant medical history and symptomology. This second section
or follow-up inquiry consists of 10 questions, divided into multiple
parts, focused on identifying signs and symptoms of any significant
cardiovascular, pulmonary, or metabolic condition. Remember that signs
or symptoms must be interpreted by a qualified professional within the
clinical context in which they appear; Certified Personal Trainers are
not qualified to make any such diagnosis. For example, if an individual
complains of some occasional chest pain and tightness, the fitness
professional should not make any diagnosis, assumptions, or deductions.
To respect scope of practice, the fitness professional should encourage
the individual to consult with their own medical provider.]{.mark}

**Health History Questionnaire (HHQ)**

[A thorough pre-exercise health history questionnaire (HHQ) collects
relevant information on the individual's past and present health and
serves to complement the PAR-Q+ in expanding one's understanding of the
participant's health. This questionnaire is not normally standardized to
the fitness industry, but rather customized to respective facilities or
organizations. In fact, a health history may be accompanied by a verbal
discussion and perhaps additional questionnaires designed to gather
further information regarding exercise history, eating behaviours, and
general lifestyle.]{.mark}

[An HHQ typically contains the following information about a client,
which is considered private and confidential:]{.mark}

- [Age]{.mark}

  [Gender]{.mark}

  [Height]{.mark}

  [Weight]{.mark}

  [Physician's name and contact information]{.mark}

  [Emergency contact information.]{.mark}

[Any information collected about an individual during the assessment
process cannot be shared without written consent from that individual;
further, the information must be securely stored away from other
co-workers and the public.]{.mark}

[The questions asked within an HHQ can vary significantly, but they
generally collect information about a client's lifestyle habits,
including exercise, diet, sleep, stress, occupation, and recreational
pursuits. In addition, the questionnaire will include questions about
medical history, including past injuries, past surgeries, chronic
diseases, and medication.]{.mark}

**Lifestyle habits**

[Understanding a client's lifestyle is an important step before
designing an exercise program. This information provides context for how
a client eats, works, sleeps, and spends leisure activity. From this
information, fitness professionals will be better equipped to design
individualized exercise programs for their clients.]{.mark}

[Exercise habits]{.underline}

[Collecting exercise and physical activity information will provide an
indication of a client's fitness level. Within this area, the fitness
professional should gather information on whether or not the individual
is currently active and participating in any regular exercise or
physical activity. If so, it's important to know details regarding the
activity: length of time (i.e., history), the nature or type, frequency,
duration, and intensity.]{.mark}

[Fitness professionals should inquire about their client's preferred
exercise activities, such as running, weight lifting, group exercise,
and others. These questions will provide opportunities to learn more
about an individual's preferences and desires, which can become relevant
during exercise programming. In addition, it is important to inquire
about a client's general thoughts and impressions regarding fitness
testing and evaluations.]{.mark}

[Discussions inquiring about a client's willingness to participate in
exercise programs can prove useful when developing exercise regimens.
For example, a fitness professional can ask a client to rank the
importance of a list of outcomes using a scale of 0 to 10, with 0 being
unimportant and 10 being very important. The list of outcomes can
include many items like losing weight, improving overall health,
increasing muscle mass, or enhancing sports performance.]{.mark}

[Dietary habits]{.underline}

[While the topic of nutrition cannot be understated, considering the
depth and breadth of nutritional information that can be collected, the
initially gathered information should be more generalized and
qualitative in nature.]{.mark}

[For example, general eating behaviours can be collected rather than
calculations of portion sizes and tracked calories. Some examples to
consider include answers to the following questions:]{.mark}

- [On a scale of 0 to 10, do you consider your overall diet to be
  healthy? (0 for unhealthy and 10 for very healthy).]{.mark}

- [Are you currently following any kind of diet? If so, what diet and
  for what reason(s)?]{.mark}

- [How would you rank your daily salt intake: low, medium, or
  high?]{.mark}

- [How would you rank your daily sugar intake: low, medium, or
  high?]{.mark}

- [How would you rank your daily fat intake: low, medium, or
  high?]{.mark}

- [On a scale of 0 to 10, how effectively are you able to control your
  temptations for junk food (0 for easily and 10 for very
  difficult)?]{.mark}

- [How many alcoholic drinks do you consume per week?]{.mark}

- [Do you consume caffeinated beverages such as coffee, tea, soda,
  and/or energy drinks? How many per week?]{.mark}

[Gathering this information helps the fitness professional, without
preexisting judgment or presumptions, gain further insight into the
client's dietary habits. Over time, the client's eating habits can be
reevaluated to determine if any improvements (or setbacks) have been
made. In addition, gathering this information assists the fitness
professional to ascertain if the client should be referred to a
registered dietitian or medical professional due to an unexpected
concern.]{.mark}

[Sleep]{.underline}

[Sleep quality and quantity is another area of interest. Fitness
professionals should inquire about their clients' sleeping habits,
including the number of hours slept each night, the quality of sleep,
and even the difficulties associated with falling asleep. Sleep is
necessary, and when done right, it replenishes energy stores depleted
from exercise and physical activity. Conversely, chronic sleep
deprivation has many health consequences, such as elevated risk for
chronic disease and negative impact on cognition and mood, to name a
few. It is important to recognize that it is out of scope for fitness
professionals to perform detailed sleep evaluations or recommend
clinical treatment to improve sleep quality. However, gaining basic
insight into a client's sleeping habits provides a coaching opportunity
on the importance of getting a good night's sleep.]{.mark}

[Stress]{.underline}

[Stress is becoming a more prominent aspect of life and can cause
serious health effects, including raising the risk of chronic disease.
Fitness professionals should inquire about their clients' stress levels,
such as using a scaling system of 0 to 10 to rate their average stress
level. Conversations about stress are also relevant. Fitness
professionals should investigate whether or not the individual is
cognitively aware of their sources of stress, the frequency with which
the individual is exposed to specific stressors, the magnitude of each
stressor, and whether or not the person has identified or implemented
any methods to manage these stressors.]{.mark}

[Similar to sleep, it is beyond a fitness professional's scope of
practice to provide counselling services and mental health treatment for
stress management. However, gaining a basic overview of the client's
stress levels provides a coaching opportunity. Fitness professionals can
share with their client how exercise and physical activity can improve
mood and disposition and reduce stress when integrated into a daily
routine.]{.mark}

[Occupation]{.underline}

[Occupational demands and work history also provide valuable insight
into potential conditions and concerns. Fitness professionals should
inquire about these aspects of their client's work:]{.mark}

- [The nature of the client's occupation]{.mark}

- [Whether the job requires extended periods of time standing, sitting,
  or performing repetitive movements (with explanations)]{.mark}

- [The workspace environment (e.g., office layout) and typical attire
  (e.g., shoes with elevated heels).]{.mark}

[If clients are sitting for long periods throughout the day, their hips
are also flexed for prolonged periods, which in turn can potentially
lead to overactive hip flexors and low-back pain. Moreover, if clients
are sitting for prolonged periods, especially in front of a computer,
there is a tendency for the shoulders and head to experience fatigue
under the constant effect of gravity, which can lead to postural
imbalances, including rounding of the shoulders and a forward head. In
addition, prolonged periods of sitting are indicative of low energy
expenditure throughout the day and potentially poor cardiorespiratory
conditioning.]{.mark}

[Wearing shoes with high heels puts the ankle complex in a plantarflexed
position for extended periods, which can lead to tightness in the calf
muscles and Achilles tendons, causing postural imbalance, such as
decreased dorsiflexion and overpronation at the foot and ankle complex,
resulting in flattening of the arch of the foot. This may lead to pain
in the feet, knees, hips, or low-back.]{.mark}

[Recreation and hobbies]{.underline}

[In the context of a fitness assessment, recreation refers to a client's
physical activities outside of the work environment, also referred to as
leisure time. By discovering the recreational activities that a client
performs, a Certified Personal Trainer can better design an exercise
program to fit the needs of their clients. For example, many clients
like to dance, golf, ski, play tennis, or perform a variety of other
sporting activities in their spare time. Proper exercise training must
be incorporated to ensure that clients are conditioned in a manner that
optimizes their physical ability, without predisposing them to
injury.]{.mark}

[Hobbies refer to activities that a client might enjoy on a regular
basis but are not necessarily athletic in nature. Examples can include
gardening, car repair, fishing, singing, or playing music. Many common
types of hobbies do not involve vigorous physical activity, yet still
need to be considered to create a properly planned exercise training
program.]{.mark}

**Medical history**

[Obtaining a client's medical history is vitally important because it
provides fitness professionals with information about known or suspected
chronic diseases, such as coronary heart disease, high blood pressure,
or diabetes. In addition, fitness professionals should inquire if their
client smokes or uses tobacco products. Furthermore, a medical history
provides information about the client's past and current health status,
as well as any past or recent injuries, surgeries, or other chronic
health conditions. Gathering this information helps determine if a
client is ready for a new exercise routine or if a medical referral is
necessary.]{.mark}

[Past injuries]{.underline}

[All past or recent injuries should be recorded and discussed in enough
detail to make decisions about whether exercise is recommended, or if a
medical referral is necessary. Previous history of musculoskeletal
injury is also a strong predictor of future injury during physical
activity.]{.mark}

[The effect of injuries on the functioning of the human body is well
documented, especially with regard to the following injuries:]{.mark}

- [Ankle sprains. These have been shown to decrease muscle activation of
  the gluteus medius and gluteus maximus muscles. In turn, this can lead
  to poor control of the lower extremities during many functional
  activities, which can eventually lead to injury]{.mark}

- [Knee injuries involving ligaments. A knee injury can cause a decrease
  in activation to muscles that stabilize the patella (kneecap) and lead
  to further injury. Noncontact knee injuries are often the result of
  ankle or hip dysfunction because the knee is caught between the ankle
  and the hip. If the ankle or hip joint begins to function improperly,
  this results in altered movement and force distribution of the knee.
  Over time, this can lead to further injury]{.mark}

- [Low-back injuries. These injuries can cause decreased activation to
  stabilizing muscles of the core, resulting in poor stabilization of
  the spine. This can further lead to dysfunction and pain]{.mark}

- [Shoulder injuries. These injuries cause altered muscle activation of
  the rotator cuff muscles, which can lead to instability of the
  shoulder joint during functional activities]{.mark}

- [Other injuries. Additional injuries can include (but are not limited
  to) repetitive hamstring strains, groin strains, patellar tendonitis
  (jumper's knee), plantar fasciitis (pain in the heel and bottom of the
  foot), shin splints, biceps tendonitis (shoulder pain), and
  headaches.]{.mark}

[Past surgeries]{.underline}

[Surgical procedures create trauma for the body. These procedures may
produce effects similar to injuries on the functioning of the human body
and the safety and efficacy of exercise. Fitness professionals
frequently interact with clients who have experienced some of the
following more common surgical procedures:]{.mark}

- [Foot and ankle surgery]{.mark}

- [Knee surgery]{.mark}

- [Back surgery]{.mark}

- [Shoulder surgery]{.mark}

- [Caesarean section for birth (cutting through the abdominal wall to
  deliver a baby)]{.mark}

- [Appendectomy (cutting through the abdominal wall to remove the
  appendix).]{.mark}

[Chronic disease]{.underline}

[The risk of chronic disease increases dramatically in those individuals
who are physically inactive. Chronic diseases can include the
following:]{.mark}

- [Cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease, coronary artery
  disease, or congestive heart failure]{.mark}

- [Hypertension (high blood pressure)]{.mark}

- [High cholesterol or other blood lipid disorders]{.mark}

- [Stroke or peripheral artery disease]{.mark}

- [Lung or breathing problems]{.mark}

- [Obesity]{.mark}

- [Diabetes mellitus]{.mark}

- [Cancer.]{.mark}

[Medications]{.underline}

[Many clients seeking fitness and exercise training advice from fitness
professionals will currently be under the care of a physician or another
medical professional, and they may be taking one or more prescribed
medications. It is not the role of the Certified Personal Trainer to
administer, prescribe, or educate clients on the usage and effects of
any form of legally prescribed medication by a licensed physician or
other healthcare provider. Certified Personal Trainers should always
consult with their client's physician or medical professionals regarding
the client's health information and which medications they may be
currently taking, if any.]{.mark}

**Conducting health and fitness assessments**

[Once the HRA is completed, and if the individual does not require
medical clearance to initiate exercise, the fitness professional should
then start to consider the need and the propriety of conducting various
fitness assessments. Although fitness assessments provide lots of
valuable information to the Certified Personal Trainer, clients may not
feel comfortable undergoing specific assessments, especially if they
believe they might not be able to complete the assessment. It's possible
that they might feel embarrassed by their results. For example, if Mary
is deconditioned, the notion of completing a 1.5-mile run test might be
both intimidating and uncomfortable. The decision on what and when to
assess is never straightforward---it requires careful consideration on
the part of the fitness professional.]{.mark}

[Assessment considerations]{.underline}

[A fitness professional should always be able to provide good rationale
for any fitness assessments that they elect to conduct on a client. This
rationale often manifests itself out of the following events, which
should always be considered on a case-by-case basis.]{.mark}

[Assessment sequencing]{.underline}

[Some assessments should be conducted prior to performing specific
exercises because of the way physical exertion impacts these
measurements. For example, resting heart rate (RHR), blood pressure, and
skinfold body fat are acutely affected by physical exertion, which may
skew results. On the other hand, flexibility is frequently assessed
following a light cardio warm-up because at this time the body displays
greater tissue extensibility.]{.mark}

[Fitness assessments that do not require physical exertion, such as the
measurement of RHR, blood pressure, or body composition, should always
be conducted prior to more vigorous fitness assessments that measure
aerobic fitness, strength, or power output.]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[Physical activity raises a person's heart rate and blood pressure.
Consequently, measurements for RHR and blood pressure should be taken
while the client is at rest.]{.mark}

[Skinfold body fat testing should also be conducted while the client is
in a rested state. Thermoregulation during exercise creates peripheral
vasodilation at or around the skin to help remove heat, but this can
increase a skinfold body fat measurement score.]{.mark}

[Assessment: safety and legal implications]{.underline}

[To maximize safety and minimize legal implications, all personnel
involved in exercise testing and supervision must have a current
certification for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and automated
external defibrillator (AED). Within a fitness facility, the
responsibilities of Certified Personal Trainers responding to
emergencies should be clearly defined and documented.]{.mark}

[CRITICAL]{.mark}

[An established written emergency plan should be clearly posted,
including emergency medical services\' telephone numbers. Regularly
scheduled emergency medical services response rehearsals are advised to
help improve response rates and times.]{.mark}

**Exercise test termination criteria**

[During the administration of an assessment involving physical exertion
(e.g., cardiorespiratory test), the fitness professional should always
be aware of signs and symptoms that merit immediate termination of the
test and a possible referral to a medical professional.]{.mark}

**Pre-assessment instructions**

[Prior to conducting any assessment, measures should be taken to ensure
individual safety and comfort. In advance, the fitness professional
should provide precise and clearly defined instructions regarding
preparation for testing. Clients should wear comfortable, athletic
clothing and ingest plenty of fluids over the 24-hour period preceding
the test to optimize hydration levels. Clients should also avoid heavy
food, tobacco, alcohol, and caffeine at least 3 hours prior to testing,
avoid exercise or strenuous activity the day before or the day of the
test, and get adequate amounts of sleep the night before the
test.]{.mark}

TRAINING TIP

[Explaining and Demonstrating Assessments]{.mark}

[Adopt a philosophy of briefly explaining the purpose of the test, the
protocol, and expectations. However, keep your explanations short and
simple and use appropriate easy-to-understand language. Because many
individuals are visual learners, include demonstrations whenever
possible (the explanation and demonstration can occur simultaneously).
When appropriate, allow for some practice trials to facilitate learning
and mastery of the physical tasks required.]{.mark}

## Fitness assessment protocols

[Fitness assessments are an integral part of the services offered by
fitness professionals to their clients. The ability to assess baseline
measurements will facilitate the design and development of exercise
programs while also providing a means to evaluate progress. Every
fitness professional should possess the knowledge, skills, and abilities
to select, administer, and interpret a variety of different
physiological parameters aligned with their client's health, fitness, or
performance goals.]{.mark}

**Heart rate**

[Heart rate (HR) is a valid indicator of work intensity or stress, both
at rest and during exercise. Monitoring changes in resting HR helps to
identify cardiovascular adaptations (becoming more aerobically fit) or
regressions (deconditioning). Resting heart rate (RHR) lowers with
improved fitness levels because the heart and lungs become more
conditioned. When this occurs, the heart becomes stronger and can pump
out more blood with each beat. This causes more oxygen and nutrients to
be transported throughout the body. Conversely, when a person's fitness
level decreases, or they become ill, the RHR may elevate. These are
important effects to understand because they provide the fitness
professional with valuable physiological feedback on the training status
of their client. However, it is also important to recognize that gender
differences do exist in RHR, with men averaging approximately 5 to 10
fewer beats per minute than women. These differences can be explained in
part to the smaller sizes of the heart chambers and lower volumes of
circulating blood in women, which require an elevated HR response. This
means that RHR measurements for men and women should not be compared
against each other to assess fitness levels. Rather, fitness
professionals should gauge how an individual's own RHR changes with
training.]{.mark}

[Measuring heart rate manually]{.underline}

[HR can be measured at many points around the body where an artery's
pulsation is transmitted to the body's surface, often occurring when a
blood vessel is compressed against an underlying structure, such as a
bone or joint. The RHR is most accurately measured just before an
individual gets out of bed in the morning.]{.mark}

[There are many anatomical locations that can be used to measure a
client's RHR. However, for accuracy, safety, and ease of administration,
we recommend that fitness professionals measure a client's radial
pulse.]{.mark}

[Blood pressure]{.underline}

[Blood pressure (BP) is defined as the outward pressure exerted by blood
on the arterial walls. Blood pressure is not consistent within each
heart beat---the pressure fluctuates between a peak and a low pressure
in the bloodstream during each beat. This explains why two numbers are
measured. Both are important to score because collectively, they provide
insight into the average pressure within the bloodstream.]{.mark}

[Systolic blood pressure (SBP), sometimes referred to as the top number,
reflects the greatest pressure during the cardiac cycle. The SBP equals
the force of blood pushing against the arterial walls when the heart is
contracting and is measured in millimetres of mercury (mm Hg).]{.mark}

[Diastolic blood pressure (DBP), sometimes referred to as the bottom
number, reflects the lowest pressure during the cardiac cycle. The DBP
equals the remaining force generated by the blood in the arteries while
the heart is relaxed (not contracting) and is also measured in
millimetres of mercury.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[We recommend fitness professionals measure RHR at the radial pulse
versus the carotid pulse (which is located at the neck just to the side
of the larynx), because the vagus nerve lies adjacent to the carotid
artery. Applying too much pressure to the vagus nerve can inadvertently
slow a client's heart rate response.]{.mark}

[Blood pressure is measured within the arterial system while using the
brachial artery as the standard site of measurement, given its ease of
access and the ability to hold the arm level with the position of the
heart, which increases the accuracy of measurement.]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[In 2017, the American College of Cardiology and American Heart
Association revised the classification scores for blood pressure and the
risk they pose to overall cardiovascular health. New research
illustrates the usefulness of DBP scores in predicting independent
mortality risks in younger adults, while SBP is more important in
predicting independent mortality risks in adults older than 50
years.]{.mark}

[Blood pressure scores are important because higher scores indicate
greater risks for developing cardiovascular disease, which can become
life-threatening. Because both SBP and DBP represent pressure within the
bloodstream, guidelines have been created that assess this degree of
risk.]{.mark}

[Measuring blood pressure]{.underline}

[Blood pressure is traditionally measured using an aneroid
sphygmomanometer, which consists of an inflatable cuff, a pressure dial,
a bulb with a valve, and a stethoscope; however, digital blood pressure
monitors are becoming more popular.]{.mark}

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Classification]{.mark}**   **[Systolic    **[Diastolic   **[Recommendation]{.mark}**
                                BP]{.mark}**   BP]{.mark}**   
  ----------------------------- -------------- -------------- ------------------------------
  [Normal]{.mark}               [\<120 mm      [\<80 mm       [Maintain]{.mark}
                                Hg]{.mark}     Hg]{.mark}     

  [Elevated]{.mark}             [120--129 mm   [\<80 mm       [Lifestyle changes]{.mark}
                                Hg]{.mark}     Hg]{.mark}     

  [Stage 1 hypertension]{.mark} [130--139 mm   [80--89 mm     [Lifestyle changes + medical
                                Hg]{.mark}     Hg]{.mark}     monitoring]{.mark}

  [Stage 2 hypertension]{.mark} [≥140 mm       [≥90 mm        [Lifestyle changes + medical
                                Hg]{.mark}     Hg]{.mark}     monitoring +
                                                              medications]{.mark}

  [Hypertensive crisis]{.mark}  [\>180 mm      [\>120 mm      [Seek immediate medical
                                Hg]{.mark}     Hg]{.mark}     attention]{.mark}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Measuring BP takes proper guidance and practice. It is recommended that
all individuals, including fitness professionals, attend a live training
class to learn how to properly assess BP. The following paragraphs are
generalized steps for assessing BP using an aneroid sphygmomanometer
(for informational purposes only).]{.mark}

[To record BP, instruct the client to assume a comfortable seated
position and place the appropriate size cuff on the client's arm just
above the elbow. Next, either rest the arm on a supported chair, or
support the arm using your own arm, and place the stethoscope over the
brachial artery, using a minimal amount of pressure. Continue by rapidly
inflating the cuff to 20 to 30 mm Hg above the point at which the pulse
can no longer be felt at the wrist. Next, release the pressure at a rate
of about 2 mm Hg per second, listening for a pulse. To determine the
SBP, listen for the first observation of the pulse. Diastolic pressure
is determined when the pulse fades away. For greater reliability, repeat
the procedure on the opposite arm.]{.mark}

[CRITICAL]{.mark}

[Abnormal Readings]{.mark}

[If abnormal readings are made during a blood pressure assessment,
repeat the measurement on the opposite arm. A significant discrepancy in
the readings between the arms could represent a circulatory problem, and
the individual should be referred to their physician for a medical
evaluation.]{.mark}

### Anthropometry and body composition measurements

[Anthropometry is the field of study of the measurement of living humans
for purposes of understanding physical variation in size, weight, and
proportion. Many different anthropometric measures exist, including body
fat assessments, body mass index (BMI), and circumference measurements.
Although many clients have goals of weight loss, what is really implied
is a loss of fat mass while retaining or perhaps gaining lean muscle
mass. While scale weight can measure and monitor weight loss, it is
unable to determine the relative ratios of fat and muscle mass
potentially being lost.]{.mark}

[The purpose behind body composition measurements is to quantify body
compositional changes (e.g., losses of fat mass) from which an
individual can be classified as healthy or unhealthy. Currently, there
is no universally accepted, standard percentage of body fat for all ages
and genders. In general, men's body fat percentages are lower than those
for women. These studies demonstrate that healthy body fat typically
ranges from about 10% to 20% for men and about 20% to 30% for women,
although these ranges can vary significantly based on the individual's
age, gender, and ethnicity.]{.mark}

**Body Mass Index**

[BMI is a rough assessment based on the concept that a person's weight
should be proportional to his or her height. An elevated BMI is linked
to increased risk of disease, especially if associated with a large
waist circumference (Aune et al., 2016). Although this assessment is not
designed to assess body fat, BMI is a quick and easy method for
determining whether a person's weight is appropriate for that person's
height.]{.mark}

[BMI can be determined using several methods, including mathematical
formulas available in both metric and imperial units and various online
calculators. There are two formulas to calculate BMI. It is calculated
by either dividing a person's weight in kilograms by the square of their
height in meters, or dividing their body weight in pounds by the square
of their height in inches, and multiplying by 703.]{.mark}

- [Metric formula: BMI = weight (kg) ÷ \[height (m)\]2]{.mark}

- [Imperial formula: BMI = 703 × weight (lb) ÷ \[height (in.)\]2]{.mark}

TRY THIS

[Calculate Mary's BMI score using either formula if she currently weighs
160 lb (72.57 kg) and stands 5 ft 7 in. or 67 in. (1.70 m).]{.mark}

[Answer: BMI = 25.1]{.mark}

[The lowest risk for disease lies within a BMI range of 22 to 24.9.
Scientific evidence indicates that the risk for disease increases with a
BMI of 25 or greater. Even though research has shown the risk for
premature death and illness does increase with a high BMI score,
individuals who are underweight are also at risk.]{.mark}

[Because of its simplicity and measurement consistency, BMI is the most
widely used measure to determine overweight and obesity levels. BMI is a
useful tool to screen the general population, but its one weakness is
that it fails to differentiate fat mass from lean body mass. Using BMI,
athletes or bodybuilders with a large amount of muscle mass can
mistakenly fall within the moderate- to high-risk categories.]{.mark}

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[BMI]{.mark}**      **[Disease               **[Classification]{.mark}**
                        Risk]{.mark}**           
  --------------------- ------------------------ -----------------------------
  [\<18.5]{.mark}       [Increased]{.mark}       [Underweight]{.mark}

  [18.5--24.9]{.mark}   [Low]{.mark}             [Healthy weight]{.mark}

  [25.0--29.9]{.mark}   [Increased]{.mark}       [Overweight]{.mark}

  [30.0--34.9]{.mark}   [High]{.mark}            [Obese]{.mark}

  [35.0--39.9]{.mark}   [Very high]{.mark}       [Obesity II]{.mark}

  [≥40.0]{.mark}        [Extremely high]{.mark}  [Obesity III]{.mark}
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Circumference measures**

[A circumference is a measure of the girth of body segments (e.g., arm,
thigh, waist, and hip), which serves to identify body shape and changes,
and acts as an important indicator of health risks for diseases such as
heart disease and diabetes.]{.mark}

- [Individuals described as android or apple-shaped are characterized as
  having more fat within the abdominal region of the body (i.e., more
  visceral fat), which is associated with elevated health risks.]{.mark}

- [Individuals described as gynoid or pear-shaped are characterized as
  having more fat within the hips and thighs, which may be associated
  with a lower health risk when compared to an android.]{.mark}

[Waist circumference]{.underline}

[The most commonly measured circumference measure is the waist
circumference; as a stand alone, it can be used to assess
health]{.mark}.

[Men with a waist circumference greater than or equal to 100 cm (\~40
in.) are at higher risk for developing health issues, such as
cardiovascular disease or diabetes, while women with a waist
circumference greater than or equal to 88 cm (\~35 in.) are at higher
risk for developing health issues like diabetes and cardiovascular
disease. It is important for fitness professionals to monitor each
client's waist circumference to identify health risks and track weight
loss efforts. However, some clients may feel apprehensive and do not
wish to have their waist measured. In these instances, fitness
professionals are advised to teach their clients how to measure their
own waistlines and report their findings back to the
professional.]{.mark}

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Risk              **[Women]{.mark}**        **[Men]{.mark}**
  Category]{.mark}**                             
  -------------------- ------------------------- -------------------------
  [Very low]{.mark}    [\<70 cm (\< 27.5         [\<80 cm (\<31.5
                       in.)]{.mark}              in.)]{.mark}

  [Low]{.mark}         [70--89 cm (27.5--35.0    [80--99 cm (31.5--38.9
                       in.)]{.mark}              in.)]{.mark}

  [High]{.mark}        [90--109 cm (35.4--42.9   [100--120 cm (39.3--47.2
                       in.)]{.mark}              in.)]{.mark}

  [Very high]{.mark}   [≥110 cm (≥43.3           [\>120 cm (\>47.2
                       in.)]{.mark}              in.)]{.mark}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Waist-to-hip ratio]{.underline}

[The waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) is another commonly used set of
circumference measurements used to assess health risk by defining the
shape of the body (i.e., android, gynoid). The hip circumference
measures the widest circumference around the hips or buttocks region,
above the gluteal fold, where the buttocks join the back of the thigh.
With both measurements, a ratio can be determined using the formula
provided.]{.mark}

[WHR = Waist Measurement ÷ Hip Measurement]{.mark}

[A high WHR has significant health implications because individuals who
are more apple-shaped and carry more fat in the abdominal region are at
greater risk for developing cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, such
as diabetes.]{.mark}

  --------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Health           **[Men]{.mark}**     **[Women]{.mark}**
  Risk]{.mark}**                           
  ------------------- -------------------- ---------------------
  [Low]{.mark}        [0.95 or             [0.80 or
                      lower]{.mark}        lower]{.mark}

  [Moderate]{.mark}   [0.96--1.0]{.mark}   [0.81--0.85]{.mark}

  [High]{.mark}       [1.0 or              [0.86 or
                      higher]{.mark}       higher]{.mark}
  --------------------------------------------------------------

[Additional circumference measures]{.underline}

[Circumference measurements can be measured at almost any body segment,
although standardized sites exist as described in Table 11-5. Some of
these measurements can also be used to quantify body composition (i.e.,
percentage of body fat), even with significantly overweight clients, but
they unfortunately correlate poorly with true body composition
measurements. They are better used to assess girth changes in the body
over time, rather than body fat percentage, and offer the convenience of
being inexpensive and easy to administer.]{.mark}

[Many clients might be keen to have their body composition measured, but
accurate assessments of body composition are not always easy to obtain.
Measuring circumference can become a good alternative, because
measurements taken at various locations can provide valuable feedback to
clients on their bodily transformation while they work toward achieving
their fitness goals.]{.mark}

**Skinfold measurements**

[Skinfold measurements continue to remain a popular method for
determining body composition, although significant skill is required in
locating the skinfold sites and accurately measuring fat folds using
callipers. This takes practice, and it is recommended that fitness
professionals learn from a trained professional before using these
techniques. Table 11-6 provides descriptions of the different locations
used by various skinfold measurement protocols.]{.mark}

[Calliper skills and techniques]{.underline}

[Skinfolds (SKF) are indirect measurements of the thickness of
subcutaneous adipose tissue (fat beneath the skin). The assumption is
that the amount of fat present in the subcutaneous region of the body is
proportional to overall body fatness, and most of the time, this is the
case. Proper assessments of body composition using skinfolds include
these recommendations:]{.mark}

- [Train with an individual skilled in SKF assessment and frequently
  compare your results against theirs.]{.mark}

- [Take a minimum of two measurements at each site; each site must be
  within 1 to 2 mm to take an average.]{.mark}

- [Completely open the jaw of the caliper before removing from the
  site.]{.mark}

- [Be meticulous when locating anatomic landmarks.]{.mark}

- [Do not measure SKFs immediately after exercise.]{.mark}

- [Instruct clients ahead of time regarding test protocol.]{.mark}

- [Avoid performing SKFs on obese clients.]{.mark}

[Jackson and Pollock seven-site protocol]{.underline}

[The Jackson and Pollock 7-Site protocol, like all SKF methods, mandates
skill and proficiency on the part of the fitness professional in
measuring the skinfold sites. To perform this assessment, the sum of the
averages of the acceptable measurements from each site are totalled and
used to calculate body density. The same seven sites are used for both
men and women. Once the sum of the SKFs has been recorded, various
online resources (e.g., tables, calculators) can be used for estimating
body fat percentage.]{.mark}

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Gender]{.mark}**   **[Sites]{.mark}**
  --------------------- --------------------------------------------------------
  [Men]{.mark}          [Chest, mid-axillary, subscapular, triceps, abdomen,
                        suprailiac, thigh]{.mark}

  [Women]{.mark}        [Chest, mid-axillary, subscapular, triceps, abdomen,
                        suprailiac, thigh]{.mark}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Jackson and Pollock three-site protocol]{.underline}

[An alternative to the seven-site protocol is the Jackson and Pollock
3-Site protocol. The three-site method can be used for determining body
composition in healthy populations. The chest, abdomen, and thigh
locations are used for men, whereas the triceps, suprailiac, and thigh
locations are used for women. This protocol holds good validity and
offers convenience as it only requires measurements to be taken at three
locations. Like the seven-site measurement, various online resources can
be used for estimating body fat percentage once the three SKFs have been
calculated.]{.mark}

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Gender]{.mark}**   **[Sites]{.mark}**
  --------------------- -----------------------------------------------
  [Men]{.mark}          [Chest, abdomen, thigh]{.mark}

  [Women]{.mark}        [Triceps, suprailiac, thigh]{.mark}
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------

[Four-site Durnin-Womersley protocol]{.underline}

[The Four-Site Durnin--Womersley protocol is an alternative to the
Jackson and Pollock formulas previously described. This formula uses a
simple four-site upper body measurement process. The four sites include
the biceps, triceps, subscapular, and suprailiac. The same four sites
are used for both men and women.]{.mark}

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Gender]{.mark}**   **[Sites]{.mark}**
  --------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  [Men]{.mark}          [Biceps, triceps, subscapular, and suprailiac]{.mark}

  [Women]{.mark}        [Biceps, triceps, subscapular, and suprailiac]{.mark}
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[After the four sites have been measured, add the totals of the four
sites and then find the appropriate sex and age categories for the body
composition on the Durnin--Womersley body fat percentage calculation.
For example, a 40-year-old female client with the sum of the SKFs of 40
has a percent body fat of 28.14%, which can be rounded down to
28%.]{.mark}

[Skinfold assessment considerations and concerns]{.underline}

[The different skinfold assessment protocols as described can provide
many options when assessing a client's body fat percentage. While
providing the fitness professional with options, it can also prove to be
confusing about which protocol to use. Some simple guidelines can
simplify the decision-making process.]{.mark}

- [Although the seven-site method is considered the most accurate
  because it collects SKFs at more locations across the body, this
  protocol is certainly more invasive to the client. As such, it may be
  best used for clinical or athletic populations.]{.mark}

- [While the Jackson and Pollock three-site protocol is perhaps not as
  accurate as the seven-site protocol, it is still considered valid. An
  advantage is that the three-site protocol is less invasive to
  conduct.]{.mark}

- [The Durnin--Womersley formula is best used for individuals between
  the ages of 17 and 49 years of age and may not be as applicable for
  older adults. A potential advantage is that it only requires
  measurements for the upper body; it does not require an individual to
  wear shorts for a thigh measurement.]{.mark}

TRAINING TIP

[Assessing body fat using skinfold callipers can be a sensitive
situation. Additionally, the accuracy of the SKFs for obese individuals
decreases; thus, it would be more appropriate not to use this method for
assessing body fat. Instead, use bioelectrical impedance, circumference
measurements, scale weight, or even the fit of clothing to evaluate
one's weight loss and body fat reduction progress.]{.mark}

**Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis**

[Unlike a skinfold assessment, bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) is
a very easy body fat assessment to administer that does not require
additional hands-on training or tables to reference. In this technique,
sensors are applied to the skin, and a weak electrical current is run
through the body to estimate body fat and lean body mass. Because muscle
cells can contain as much as 70% to 75% water in comparison to fat cells
that contain only about 10% to 15% water, a leaner individual will
experience less resistance and reactance to the electrical flow versus
an individual with more body fat. In other words, fat is a less
efficient conductor than lean body tissue; the faster the conduction,
the leaner the individual. Body weight scales with sensors, as well as
handheld devices, are available to conduct this procedure.]{.mark}

[Given the advances in technology in assessing body composition through
BIA, and the concerns over SKF measurement (e.g., invasive nature, time
investment, reliability of fitness professionals), BIA is becoming more
commonly conducted in fitness settings. However, BIA does have its own
limitations that can compromise the accuracy of the measurements taken.
These include any event where the body either retains or loses water.
Examples include fluctuating hydration levels, dehydration, extreme
temperatures, heavy sweat rates, the use of diuretics, and even the
presence of urine in the bladder volume. Furthermore, the quality of the
BIA device is also an important consideration because lower-quality
devices are more likely to produce inaccurate results versus
higher-quality multi-extremity devices that measure at both extremities
(i.e., hands and feet).]{.mark}

**Hydrostatic Underwater Weighing**

[Underwater weighing, often referred to as hydrostatic weighing, has
been the most common technique used in exercise physiology labs to
determine body composition. This method is founded on the principle that
bone, muscle, and connective tissues are denser and heavier in
comparison to fat tissue, which is less dense, lighter, and floats. In
essence, a person's weight on land is compared to their underwater
weight to determine fat percentage.]{.mark}

[The science behind this process is Archimedes' principle. Archimedes'
principle is a physical law of buoyancy. Because bone and muscle are
denser than water, a person with a larger percentage of lean body mass
will weigh more in the water and ultimately have a lower body fat
percentage versus someone with less lean body mass. A person with more
body fat will make the body lighter in water and will have a higher
percentage of body fat. This technique is very accurate, but for obvious
reasons, it is not practical outside of a laboratory setting.]{.mark}

### Cardiorespiratory assessments

[Cardiorespiratory fitness also commonly referred to as cardio fitness
or aerobic fitness, is often assessed to evaluate a client's capacity
for performing work. Knowledge of this capacity is important because it
serves as a significant predictor of overall health, of one's capacity
to perform physical work, and even of longevity.]{.mark}

[Cardiorespiratory assessments can use multiple formats, such as
treadmill, step machine, or bicycle, and range from simple to very
complex, all depending on the client's abilities or the fitness goals
that they plan to achieve.]{.mark}

[Cardiorespiratory assessments help the fitness professional identify
starting exercise intensities that are safe and effective for clients,
as well as appropriate modes of cardiorespiratory exercise.]{.mark}

**VO2max**

[mitochondria]{.mark}

- [A higher VO2max score reflects greater oxygen utilization and a
  greater capacity for physical work.]{.mark}

- [VO2max usually peaks at around ages 25 years to the early 30s, but it
  is highly trainable, implying that an active person in their 40s could
  have a higher VO2max than during their sedentary 20s.]{.mark}

- [VO2max decreases by approximately 5% per decade in fit individuals
  (an average of 0.5% per year) and around 10% per decade in unfit
  individuals (an average of 1.0% per year).]{.mark}

[Conducting a VO2max assessment provides the fitness professional with
an indication of the client's overall aerobic fitness. However, it is
perhaps a better marker of health, mortality, and morbidity. VO2max may
be the single most effective predictor of heart function because VO2
scores reflect overall heart health. Individuals with higher VO2max
scores generally have healthier hearts, have a greater capacity to
perform work, and may have lower risks of developing heart disease.
However, it is not always practical to measure because of equipment
requirements, time involved, and the willingness of clients to perform
at maximal physical capacity. Therefore, submaximal tests are often the
preferred method for determining cardiorespiratory functional capacity
and fitness.]{.mark}

**Ratings of Perceived Exertion**

[A subjective rating of perceived exertion (RPE) is a technique used to
express or validate how hard a client feels that they are working during
exercise. When using the RPE method, a person is subjectively rating the
perceived difficulty of exercise. It is based on overall physical
sensations experienced by a person during physical activity, which would
include increased heart rate, increased respiration rate, increased
sweating, and muscle fatigue. The client's subjective rating should be
reported based on the overall feelings of how hard they are working,
including an overall sense of fatigue rather than isolated areas of the
body (i.e., tired legs during treadmill testing). Although the RPE scale
is a subjective measure, if clients report their exertion ratings
accurately, RPE does provide a good estimate of the actual heart rate
during physical activity. There are two versions of RPE: the original 6
to 20 scale, and the newer 1 to 10 scale.]{.mark}

+--------------------------------------------------------+
| **[Original Scale]{.mark}**                            |
+:======================+:===============================+
| [6]{.mark}            |                                |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [7]{.mark}            | [Very, very light]{.mark}      |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [8]{.mark}            |                                |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [9]{.mark}            | [Very light]{.mark}            |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [10]{.mark}           |                                |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [11]{.mark}           | [Fairly light]{.mark}          |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [12]{.mark}           |                                |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [13]{.mark}           | [Somewhat hard]{.mark}         |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [14]{.mark}           |                                |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [15]{.mark}           | [Hard]{.mark}                  |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [16]{.mark}           |                                |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [17]{.mark}           | [Very hard]{.mark}             |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [18]{.mark}           |                                |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [19]{.mark}           | [Very, very hard]{.mark}       |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| [20]{.mark}           |                                |
+-----------------------+--------------------------------+

  -------------------------------------------------------
  **[Rating]{.mark}**   **[Perceived Exertion
                        Level]{.mark}**
  --------------------- ---------------------------------
  [0]{.mark}            [No exertion, at rest]{.mark}

  [1]{.mark}            [Very light]{.mark}

  [2-3]{.mark}          [Light]{.mark}

  [4-5]{.mark}          [Moderate, somewhat hard]{.mark}

  [6-7]{.mark}          [High, vigorous]{.mark}

  [8-9]{.mark}          [Very hard]{.mark}

  [10]{.mark}           [Maximum effort, highest
                        possible]{.mark}
  -------------------------------------------------------

**YMCA 3-minute step test**

[The YMCA 3-minute step test is a cardiorespiratory assessment that
assesses the aerobic fitness of deconditioned clients by having them
complete 3 minutes of continuous stepping on and off a 12-in. (30-cm)
box. With this assessment, cardiorespiratory fitness is evaluated from
the recovery heart rate (RHR) rather than from an estimate of VO2max.
The YMCA 3-minute step test is considered suitable for low-risk,
apparently healthy, nonathletic adults.]{.mark}

[YMCA 3-Minute Step Test Instructions]{.mark}

- [Briefly discuss the protocol, answer all questions satisfactorily,
  and allow adequate warm-up, stretching, and recovery prior to
  conducting the test.]{.mark}

- [Ensure that proper athletic footwear is worn for the test.]{.mark}

- [Terminate the test if the individual experiences any symptoms of
  light-headedness, dizziness, chest pain, or excessive shortness of
  breath.]{.mark}

- [The client will perform 96 steps per minute. Fitness professionals
  can demonstrate proper step cadence by setting a metronome to 96
  "clicks" per minute and allow practice trials. If the fitness
  professional does not have access to a metronome, they can state out
  loud, "up, up, down, down" to help keep the correct cadence.]{.mark}

- [Begin the 3-minute test and maintain cadence throughout the
  test.]{.mark}

- [After completing the test, the individual sits while the fitness
  professional quickly palpates the radial pulse (within 5 seconds) and
  measures the number of heartbeats over the ensuing 60 seconds.]{.mark}

  - [Count starts at zero.]{.mark}

  - [The individual should lightly paddle feet to maintain
    circulation.]{.mark}

  - [Allow for a proper cool-down following data collection.]{.mark}

[Test Interpretation: Once the 60-second HR count is collected, the
individual's fitness level can be categorized.]{.mark}

[The YMCA 3-minute step test is very basic and does not impose much of a
cardiovascular challenge for aerobically fit adults. It is primarily
intended as a protocol for deconditioned individuals or older adults who
do not have any balance, joint issues, or concerns associated with
stepping to measure how quickly their heart rate returns to normal after
exercise.]{.mark}

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Ratings for Men   **[18--25]{.mark}**   **[26--35]{.mark}**   **[36--45]{.mark}**   **[46--55]{.mark}**   **[56--65]{.mark}**   **[≥65]{.mark}**
  (age)]{.mark}**                                                                                                                    
  -------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- -------------------
  [Excellent]{.mark}   [50--76]{.mark}       [51--76]{.mark}       [49--76]{.mark}       [56--82]{.mark}       [60--77]{.mark}       [59--81]{.mark}

  [Good]{.mark}        [79--84]{.mark}       [79--85]{.mark}       [80--88]{.mark}       [87--93]{.mark}       [86--94]{.mark}       [87--92]{.mark}

  [Above               [88--93]{.mark}       [88--94]{.mark}       [92--88]{.mark}       [95--101]{.mark}      [97--100]{.mark}      [94--102]{.mark}
  average]{.mark}                                                                                                                    

  [Average]{.mark}     [95--100]{.mark}      [96--102]{.mark}      [100--105]{.mark}     [103--111]{.mark}     [103--109]{.mark}     [104--110]{.mark}

  [Below               [102--107]{.mark}     [104--110]{.mark}     [108--113]{.mark}     [113--119]{.mark}     [111--117]{.mark}     [114--118]{.mark}
  average]{.mark}                                                                                                                    

  [Poor]{.mark}        [111--119]{.mark}     [114--121]{.mark}     [116--124]{.mark}     [121--126]{.mark}     [119--128]{.mark}     [121--126]{.mark}

  [Very poor]{.mark}   [124--157]{.mark}     [126--161]{.mark}     [130--163]{.mark}     [131--159]{.mark}     [131--154]{.mark}     [130--151]{.mark}

  [Ratings for Women   [18-25]{.mark}        [26--35]{.mark}       [36--45]{.mark}       [46--55]{.mark}       [56--65]{.mark}       [≥65]{.mark}
  (age)]{.mark}                                                                                                                      

  [Excellent]{.mark}   [52--81]{.mark}       [58--80]{.mark}       [51--84]{.mark}       [63--91]{.mark}       [60--92]{.mark}       [70--92]{.mark}

  [Good]{.mark}        [85--93]{.mark}       [85--92]{.mark}       [89--96]{.mark}       [95--101]{.mark}      [97--103]{.mark}      [96--101]{.mark}

  [Above               [96--102]{.mark}      [95--101]{.mark}      [100--104]{.mark}     [104--110]{.mark}     [106--111]{.mark}     [104--111]{.mark}
  average]{.mark}                                                                                                                    

  [Average]{.mark}     [104--110]{.mark}     [104--110]{.mark}     [107--112]{.mark}     [113--118]{.mark}     [113--118]{.mark}     [116--121]{.mark}

  [Below               [113--120]{.mark}     [113--119]{.mark}     [115--120]{.mark}     [120--124]{.mark}     [119--127]{.mark}     [123--126]{.mark}
  average]{.mark}                                                                                                                    

  [Poor]{.mark}        [122--131]{.mark}     [122--129]{.mark}     [124--132]{.mark}     [126--132]{.mark}     [129--135]{.mark}     [128--133]{.mark}

  [Very poor]{.mark}   [135--169]{.mark}     [134--171]{.mark}     [137--169]{.mark}     [137--171]{.mark}     [141--174]{.mark}     [135--155]{.mark}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Rockport Walk Test**

[For new exercisers who may not be very fit, a walking test is
considered an appropriate cardiorespiratory assessment, providing an
appropriate challenge while requiring little skill development or
learning to complete the test. The Rockport walk test is a 1-mile
walking test that predicts maximal oxygen consumption (VO2max) from
either a timed performance or heart rate response. Fitness professionals
should keep in mind that for fit individuals, this test will most likely
underpredict their VO2max because it was not designed for fit
individuals. While the test was originally developed for outdoor use on
a track, it can also be used indoors using a treadmill. Rockport Walk
Test Instructions]{.mark}

- [Briefly discuss the protocol, answer all questions satisfactorily,
  and allow adequate warm-up, stretching, and recovery prior to
  conducting the test.]{.mark}

- [Ensure that proper athletic footwear is worn for the test.]{.mark}

- [Terminate the test if the individual experiences any symptoms of
  light-headedness, dizziness, chest pain, or excessive shortness of
  breath.]{.mark}

- [The goal of the test is to complete the 1-mile (1.6-km) distance as
  quickly as possible. Pacing may be necessary, but no running or
  jogging is permitted. Instead, the client will walk as quickly as
  possible.]{.mark}

[Test Interpretation:]{.mark}

1.  [Use the next table to determine results of the test.]{.mark}

Normative Values for the Rockport Walk Test

+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| **[Rating]{.mark}**    | **[Males (Age 30--69        | **[Females (Age 30--69      |
|                        | years)]{.mark}**            | years)]{.mark}**            |
|                        +-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|                        | **[Time                     | **[Time                     |
|                        | (minutes:seconds)]{.mark}** | (minutes:seconds)]{.mark}** |
+:=======================+:============================+:============================+
| [Excellent]{.mark}     | [\<10:12]{.mark}            | [\<11:40]{.mark}            |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Good]{.mark}          | [10:13--11:42]{.mark}       | [11:41--13:08]{.mark}       |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Above average]{.mark} | [11:43--13:13]{.mark}       | [13:09--14:36]{.mark}       |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Average]{.mark}       | [13:14--14:44]{.mark}       | [14:37--16:04]{.mark}       |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Fair]{.mark}          | [14:45--16:23]{.mark}       | [16:05--17:31]{.mark}       |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Poor]{.mark}          | [\>16:24]{.mark}            | [\>17:32]{.mark}            |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Percentile]{.mark}                                                                |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [90%]{.mark}           | [11:08]{.mark}              | [11:45]{.mark}              |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [75%]{.mark}           | [11:42]{.mark}              | [12:49]{.mark}              |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [50%]{.mark}           | [12:38]{.mark}              | [13:15]{.mark}              |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [25%]{.mark}           | [13:38]{.mark}              | [14:12]{.mark}              |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [10%]{.mark}           | [14:37]{.mark}              | [15:03]{.mark}              |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+

**The 1.5-Mile Run Test**

[For more fit population groups, the 1.5-mile (2.4 km) run test is a
cardiorespiratory assessment that can be used to measure a client's
aerobic endurance. The 1.5-mile run test estimates aerobic fitness
levels by either scoring the individual's timed performance or their
heart rate response, which is used to estimate VO2max. This test, much
like the Rockport walk test, was originally developed as a field test
(i.e., conducted on a track), but it can be administered indoors on a
treadmill. 1.5-Mile Run Test Instructions]{.mark}

- [Briefly discuss the protocol, answer all questions satisfactorily,
  and allow for adequate warm-up, stretching, and recovery prior to
  conducting the test.]{.mark}

- [Ensure that proper athletic footwear is worn for the test.]{.mark}

- [Terminate the test if the individual experiences any symptoms of
  light-headedness, dizziness, chest pain, or excessive shortness of
  breath.]{.mark}

- [The goal of the test is to complete the 1.5-mile distance as quickly
  as possible. Pacing may be necessary.]{.mark}

[Test Interpretation: Use the next tables to determine the results of
the test.]{.mark}

Normative Values for the 1.5 Mile Run (Men)

+---------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **[Rating]{.mark}** | **[Time to Complete 1.5 Mile Run Rating]{.mark}**                                                                     |
|                     +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                     | **[20--29             | **[30--39             | **[40--49             | **[50--59             | **[60--69             |
|                     | years]{.mark}**       | years]{.mark}**       | years]{.mark}**       | years]{.mark}**       | years]{.mark}**       |
+:====================+:======================+:======================+:======================+:======================+:======================+
| [Superior]{.mark}   | [8:22--9:10]{.mark}   | [8:49--9:31]{.mark}   | [9:02--9:47]{.mark}   | [9:31--10:27]{.mark}  | [10:09--11:20]{.mark} |
+---------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| [Excellent]{.mark}  | [9:34--10:08]{.mark}  | [9:52--10:38]{.mark}  | [10:09--11:09]{.mark} | [11:09--12:08]{.mark} | [12:10--13:25]{.mark} |
+---------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| [Good]{.mark}       | [10:49--11:27]{.mark} | [11:09--11:49]{.mark} | [11:52--12:25]{.mark} | [12:53--13:53]{.mark} | [14:33--15:20]{.mark} |
+---------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| [Fair]{.mark}       | [11:58--12:29]{.mark} | [12:25--12:53]{.mark} | [13:05--13:50]{.mark} | [14:33--15:14]{.mark} | [16:19--17:19]{.mark} |
+---------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| [Poor]{.mark}       | [13:08--13:58]{.mark} | [13:48--14:33]{.mark} | [14:33--15:32]{.mark} | [16:16--17:30]{.mark} | [18:39--20:13]{.mark} |
+---------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| [Very Poor]{.mark}  | [15:14--20:55]{.mark} | [15:56--20:55]{.mark} | [17:04--22:22]{.mark} | [19:24--27:08]{.mark} | [23:27--31:59]{.mark} |
+---------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

Normative Values for the 1.5 Mile Run (Women)

+---------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **[Rating]{.mark}** | **[Time to Complete 1.5 Mile Run Rating]{.mark}**                                                                     |
|                     +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                     | **[20--29             | **[30--39             | **[40--49             | **[50--59             | **[60--69             |
|                     | years]{.mark}**       | years]{.mark}**       | years]{.mark}**       | years]{.mark}**       | years]{.mark}**       |
+:====================+:======================+:======================+:======================+:======================+:======================+
| [Superior]{.mark}   | [9:23--10:20]{.mark}  | [9:52--11:08]{.mark}  | [10:09--11:35]{.mark} | [11:34--13:16]{.mark} | [12:25--14:28]{.mark} |
+---------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| [Excellent]{.mark}  | [10:59--11:56]{.mark} | [11:43--12:53]{.mark} | [12:25--13:38]{.mark} | [13:58--15:14]{.mark} | [15:32--16:46]{.mark} |
+---------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| [Good]{.mark}       | [12:51--13:25]{.mark} | [13:41--14:33]{.mark} | [14:33--15:17]{.mark} | [16:26--17:19]{.mark} | [18:05--18:52]{.mark} |
+---------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| [Fair]{.mark}       | [14:15--15:05]{.mark} | [15:14--15:56]{.mark} | [16:13--17:11]{.mark} | [18:05--19:10]{.mark} | [20:08--20:55]{.mark} |
+---------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| [Poor]{.mark}       | [15:56--17:11]{.mark} | [16:46--18:18]{.mark} | [18:26--19:43]{.mark} | [20:17--21:57]{.mark} | [22:34--23:55]{.mark} |
+---------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| [Very Poor]{.mark}  | [18:39--25:17]{.mark} | [20:13--25:10]{.mark} | [21:52--27:55]{.mark} | [23:55--30:34]{.mark} | [26:32--33:05]{.mark} |
+---------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

GETTING TECHNICAL

[Another popular cardiorespiratory assessment is the 1-mile (1.6-km) run
test. Although this test is practically feasible, its ability to
evaluate cardiorespiratory fitness across the general population is
limited because its validation (i.e., research studies) was focused
primarily on youth and college-aged individuals. The 1.5-mile run test
provides a more valid evaluation of aerobic fitness across a larger
population group and is therefore considered a more appropriate test to
use with clients. However, because the duration of this assessment is
longer than the 1-mile run test, there is certainly more of a demand for
experience and pacing throughout this assessment.]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[Perhaps the biggest limitation of the assessments discussed is that
they only provide generalized estimates of aerobic fitness rather than a
personalized score unique to the individual. Therefore, research and
newer ideas have evolved to assess cardiorespiratory fitness and
efficiency based on a person's unique metabolism.]{.mark}

**The Talk Test**

[The talk test (or continuous talk method) is an informal
cardiorespiratory assessment used to gauge the intensity of the activity
based on the client's own unique metabolic markers and ability to hold a
conversation. Gauging the client's ability or inability to talk
continuously during aerobic exercise has existed as a nonspecific guide
for exercise intensity for many years. However, over the past 20 years,
researchers have investigated this concept further and determined that
intensity that disrupts talking and breathing is connected to specific
metabolic events happening within the body's energy systems.]{.mark}

**The ventilatory threshold (vt1) test**

[The ventilatory threshold 1 (VT1) test is an incremental test performed
on any device (e.g., treadmill, bicycle) that gradually progresses in
intensity level and relies on the interpretation of the way a person
talks to determine a specific event at which the body's metabolism
undergoes a significant change.]{.mark}

[A key point for this protocol is to remember that it is an aerobic test
that aims to estimate the intensity of the body's usage of a balance of
fuels (i.e., 50% fat, 50% carbohydrates). Because it is an aerobic test,
steady-state (SS) heart rate must be attained before any assessment of
talking is collected.]{.mark}

[VT1 Test Considerations]{.mark}

- [Determine the preferred exercise modality (e.g., treadmill,
  bicycle).]{.mark}

- [Determine the preference for increasing workloads (e.g., speed,
  grade, wattage). A range of 0.5 to 1 mph increases or 1% to 2%
  inclines are used for treadmills; 15- to 25-watt increases are used
  for cycling, and 10- to 15-watt increases are used for arm
  ergometers.]{.mark}

- [Determine the duration of each stage. Stages usually last between 1
  and 3 minutes to ensure that SS heart rate is attained. Larger
  increases in intensity require longer durations to attain SS heart
  rate and are not recommended. Remember, SS heart rate implies a
  visible levelling of the client's heart rate at each stage, rather
  than continuing to climb upwards.]{.mark}

- [Conduct the continuous talk test once a steady state heart rate is
  attained. The continuous talk test involves speaking continuously for
  about 20 seconds, although the talking challenge can usually be
  observed within 10 seconds. The continuous talk test must be
  continuous and recited from memory, for example, the phonetic
  alphabet: "A is for apple, B is for boy, C is for cat." Another option
  is to have the client share information regarding their typical
  morning routine, detailing the steps involved in getting ready for
  work or school. Just remember that the dialogue they provide needs to
  be continuous, as explained previously.]{.mark}

[VT1 Test Instructions]{.mark}

- [Briefly discuss the protocol, answer all questions, and allow
  adequate warm-up, stretching, and recovery before starting the
  test.]{.mark}

- [Begin the test at an intensity considered light to easy and gradually
  progress through incremental stages, performing the continuous talk
  test toward the end of each stage, once an SS heart rate is
  attained.]{.mark}

- [Repeat the continuous talk test until the talk test becomes
  challenging, but not difficult, for the client. This is a sign that
  the client has reached VT1. At this moment, record the client's heart
  rate and speed, grade, or wattage, depending on which type of
  equipment is being used.]{.mark}

- [Evaluate the challenge of continuous talking:]{.mark}

  - [Observe the ability to speak continuously at a conversational pace
    (e.g., smooth, streamlined, and continuous versus choppy,
    interrupted, and disjointed).]{.mark}

  - [Ask the individual to rate the challenge (e.g., an easy, small
    challenge, an uncomfortable/challenging task, or a difficult, nearly
    impossible task); VT1 is marked as uncomfortable or
    challenging.]{.mark}

  - [Listen to the client's breathing sounds; VT1 occurs when breathing
    becomes clearly audible with fairly visible signs of rib cage
    elevation.]{.mark}

  - [Consider continuing one stage beyond the suspected VT1 stage to
    validate the assessment.]{.mark}

[Ideally, this protocol should be repeated within 2 to 3 days for
purposes of reliability; use the average physiological response to
notate the client's VT1.]{.mark}

[Example VT1 test]{.underline}

[1-minute stages were selected because of the small work increments
(i.e., 0.5 mph per stage), which is usually ample time to attain a SS
heart rate response. At minute 9 (6.5 mph), the continuous talk test
becomes challenging, which corresponds to a heart rate of 142 beats per
minute (bpm) and an RPE (10-point scale) of 6.5. At 6.0 mph, breathing
and continuous talking remain somewhat easy, whereas at 7.0 mph, they
become difficult. As mentioned previously in the protocol instructions,
the continuous talk test should ideally be conducted on two separate
occasions for reliability purposes, with the average score being
recorded as VT1.]{.mark}

Example of a VT1 Test With 1-Minute Incremental Increases

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Time]{.mark}**       **[Speed]{.mark}**   **[Talk Test]{.mark}** **[HR]{.mark}**   **[RPE
                                                                                        1--10]{.mark}**
  ----------------------- -------------------- ---------------------- ----------------- -----------------
  [Warm-up (minutes       [4.0 mph]{.mark}                                              
  1--4)]{.mark}                                                                         

  [Minute 5]{.mark}       [4.5 mph]{.mark}     [Easy]{.mark}          [117]{.mark}      [3.5]{.mark}

  [Minute 6]{.mark}       [5.0 mph]{.mark}     [Easy]{.mark}          [125]{.mark}      [4]{.mark}

  [Minute 7]{.mark}       [5.5 mph]{.mark}     [Somewhat easy]{.mark} [133]{.mark}      [5]{.mark}

  [Minute 8]{.mark}       [6.0 mph]{.mark}     [Somewhat easy]{.mark} [138]{.mark}      [6]{.mark}

  [Minute 9]{.mark}       [6.5 mph]{.mark}     [Challenging]{.mark}   [142]{.mark}      [6.5]{.mark}

  [Minute 10]{.mark}      [7.0 mph]{.mark}     [Difficult]{.mark}     [147]{.mark}      [7]{.mark}

  [Cool down (minute      [4.0 mph]{.mark}                                              
  11--14)]{.mark}                                                                       
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Proficiency in identifying VT1 depends largely on the fitness
professional's ability to accurately determine when continuous talking
becomes challenging. This may take time, practice, and repetition, but
once proficiency is established, this skill set will allow the fitness
professional to identify an individualized and unique metabolic event
where the body shifts from fat as its primary fuel to an equal mix of
fat and carbohydrate fuel sources. This intensity will serve as an
important intensity marker when designing cardiorespiratory exercise
programs.]{.mark}

**VT2 talk test**

[For individuals who have more performance-centric goals, their capacity
to sustain high-intensity work becomes important as a predictor of
success. The ventilatory threshold 2 (VT2) talk test measures the level
at which the body can work at its highest sustainable steady-state
intensity for more than a few minutes. At this level, the body relies
heavily on the anaerobic energy systems that begin to overwhelm the
blood's lactic acid buffering capacity.]{.mark}

[In fact, VT2 corresponds with an individual's inability to speak during
exercise. In other words, at this level of intensity, the individual
cannot verbally respond to a question or responds "no" to the question,
Can you speak competently?]{.mark}

[This measurement (VT2) is a critical measurement of athletic
performance, because the intensity immediately below this level
represents the exercise pace that an endurance athlete can sustain
throughout their race or training to attain their best
performance.]{.mark}

[VT2 Test Considerations]{.mark}

- [VT2 testing is only recommended for individuals with performance
  goals given the purpose, nature, and intensity required for measuring
  this physiological marker.]{.mark}

- [While several standardized field tests exist (e.g., 60-minute ride,
  30- or 60-minute runs), they demand a lot of time and are tedious to
  administer.]{.mark}

- [A modified test, such as a 20-minute run or ride test protocol,
  provides a viable alternative, which is easier to conduct than the
  standardized 30- or 60-minute protocols.]{.mark}

- [The test requires the subject to maintain their highest-sustainable
  pace for 20 minutes and the fitness professional to record the
  client's heart rate and marker of performance (e.g., RPE, speed,
  wattage) over the last 5 minutes.]{.mark}

[VT2 Test Instructions]{.mark}

- [Briefly discuss the protocol, answer all questions, and allow
  adequate warm-up, stretching, and recovery prior to conducting the
  test.]{.mark}

- [To start, increase the intensity to a predetermined pace. Some
  careful programming is required to determine this pace, but allow for
  some minor adjustments as needed during the first few minutes of the
  bout. Remember that the client will need to hold this pace for 20
  minutes; it should be the most intense pace they can safely
  handle.]{.mark}

- [Record the individual's heart rate and marker of performance (e.g.,
  speed, wattage, RPE) during the last 5 minutes of the bout.]{.mark}

- [Use the average heart rates collected over the last 5 minutes, then
  correct that number by 95% to estimate the client's VT2. This 5%
  correction is needed because a 20-minute pace is usually more intense
  than when a client is performing a 30- to 60-minute test.]{.mark}

**[Example VT2 test]{.mark}**

[As an example, Amy starts her test at 8.5 mph, then adjusts it to 8.8
mph within the first 3 minutes and sustains this pace for the remainder
of the run. Her heart rate responses are as follows:]{.mark}

- [Minute 16: HR = 176 bpm]{.mark}

  [Minute 17: HR = 178 bpm]{.mark}

  [Minute 18: HR = 177 bpm]{.mark}

  [Minute 19: HR = 179 bpm]{.mark}

  [Minute 20: HR = 179 bpm]{.mark}

[Amy's average HR = 177.8 bpm × 0.95 = 168.9 bpm, or 169 when rounded
up.]{.mark}

## Postural, Movement, and Performance Assessments

[Posture, movement, and performance assessments are an integral part of
the intake process for all clients and will assist the fitness
professional in developing customized fitness programs to enhance a
client's well-being. Static posture is the positioning of the
musculoskeletal system while the body is standing still, whereas a
person's dynamic posture represents what happens to that alignment when
the body is in motion. Functional movement is the means by which
individuals can perform activities ranging from activities of daily
living to occupational tasks to sports and recreational enjoyment. It is
important that fitness professionals are proficient at recognizing
optimal movement based on a foundation of anatomy and kinesiology.
Further, understanding optimal postural alignment and movement
strategies allows fitness professionals to identify movement impairments
by conducting movement assessments, which can indicate possible muscle
imbalances or mobility limitations. In addition, performance assessments
can be used to assess a client's power, strength, and muscular
endurance, which are necessary for athletic endeavours.]{.mark}

**Importance of posture**

[Optimal posture allows for an individual's body to be aligned in a
manner that decreases stress on bodily tissues and joints, whether in
seated, standing, or lying positions. However, due to a lack of postural
awareness as well as work environments that require excessive sitting,
many individuals suffer from poor posture. This can negatively affect
the length-tension of muscles and increase stress on the body throughout
the day. As a result, it is important for the fitness professional to
have confidence in evaluating static standing posture, which will also
serve as the foundation for movement assessments.]{.mark}

[When the Certified Personal Trainer works with a client for the first
time, it is a good idea to first gain an understanding of their client's
static posture. Many of the postural deviations that are detected in a
static postural assessment will also occur during various movement
assessments. For example, if the client presents with a flattened arch
of the foot, also known as pes planus, in static posture, they will
typically also display altered foot and ankle mechanics during various
movement assessments. When impairments are identified across multiple
assessments, this is a good indication that exercise programming should
address these issues.]{.mark}

**Muscle imbalances**

[Muscle imbalances are alterations in the lengths of muscles surrounding
a joint in which some are overactive (forcing compensation to occur) and
others may be underactive (allowing for the compensation to occur). In
other words, muscle imbalance is a condition in which there is a lack of
balance between muscles surrounding a joint. Muscle imbalance can be
caused by a variety of mechanisms, including (but not limited to)
repetitive movement, sedentary lifestyle, and trauma.]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[The terms *overactive* and *underactive* are used in this text to refer
to the activity level of a muscle relative to another muscle or muscle
group, not necessarily to its own normal functional capacity. When a
muscle is overactive, it is in a state of elevated neural activity
(compared to its antagonist muscle), which causes the muscle to be held
in a chronic state of contraction. When a muscle is underactive, it is
in a state of inhibited neural drive (compared to its antagonist
muscle). This can cause the muscle's functional antagonist to pull it
into a chronically elongated state.]{.mark}

**Static postural assessment**

[A static postural assessment allows the fitness professional to look
for any deviations from optimal alignment of the body in a standing
posture. Over time, these deviations can cause muscle imbalances or
compromise joint mobility. A static postural assessment requires strong
visual observation skills that are developed with time and practice, and
it requires a systematic approach. Commonly, static postural assessments
begin at the feet and travel upwards toward the head. The static
postural assessment includes anterior, lateral, and posterior views to
observe all the potential deviations from optimal posture. Leveraging
the kinetic chain checkpoints enables the fitness professional to
systematically view the body during stance and motion. Although each
region of the body will be assessed individually, the fitness
professional should think of the body as an interconnected system, where
one joint or region has an impact on the others. For example, overactive
hip flexors from prolonged sitting may cause an anterior pelvic tilt,
which then causes lumbar (low-back) extension.]{.mark}

[The static postural assessment administered by a fitness professional
is a simplified version of a thorough evaluation that would be performed
by a healthcare professional, such as a physical therapist or physician.
In general, the fitness professional should look for neutral alignment,
symmetry, balanced muscle tone, and common postural deviations.]{.mark}

[The kinetic chain checkpoints refer to major joint regions of the body,
including the following:]{.mark}

1.  [Feet and ankles]{.mark}

2.  [Knees]{.mark}

3.  [Lumbo-pelvic-hip complex (LPHC)]{.mark}

4.  [Shoulders]{.mark}

5.  [Head and neck]{.mark}

[Anterior View]{.mark}

1.  [Feet/ankles: Straight and parallel; not flattened or externally
    rotated]{.mark}

2.  [Knees: In line with toes; not in knee valgus (knock-kneed) or knee
    varus (bowlegged)]{.mark}

3.  [LPHC: Level pelvis; not rotated or hiked on one side]{.mark}

4.  [Shoulders: Level; not elevated or rounded]{.mark}

5.  [Head: Neutral position; not forward, tilted or rotated]{.mark}

[Note: An imaginary line should begin between the feet, extending upward
between the lower extremities, through the midline of the pelvis, and
bisecting the trunk and skull.]{.mark}

[Lateral View]{.mark}

1.  [Feet/ankles: Leg vertical at right angle to sole of foot]{.mark}

2.  [Knees: Neutral position; not flexed or hyperextended]{.mark}

3.  [LPHC: Pelvis and lumbar spine in neutral position; not anteriorly
    (lumbar extension) or posteriorly tilted (lumbar flexion)]{.mark}

4.  [Shoulders: Shoulders aligned with ears; not excessively
    rounded]{.mark}

5.  [Head: Neutral position; not "jutting" forward]{.mark}

[Note: An imaginary line should run through the lateral malleolus
(lateral ankle bone), middle of the femur (thigh bone), center of
shoulder, and middle of the ear.]{.mark}

[Posterior View]{.mark}

1.  [Foot/ankle: Heels are straight and parallel; Achilles tendon is
    vertical; calcaneus (heel bone) not excessively everted; weight is
    equally balanced between right and left sides]{.mark}

2.  [Knees: Neutral position, not in valgus or varus]{.mark}

3.  [LPHC: Pelvis is level; not rotated or hiked on one side]{.mark}

4.  [Shoulders/scapulae: Level; not elevated or protracted]{.mark}

5.  [Head: Neutral position; neither tilted nor rotated]{.mark}

[Note: An imaginary line should begin between the feet, extending upward
between the lower extremities, through the midline of the pelvis, and
bisecting the trunk and skull. When examining exclusively the foot and
ankle, an imaginary line should begin at the midline of the calcaneus
(heel bone), extending upward along the Achilles tendon. The Achilles
tendon should be vertical.]{.mark}

**Common distortion patterns**

[How a client presents in static stance is, in a sense, a roadmap of how
they have been using their body with time. Interestingly, the body tends
to compensate in observable patterns, causing predictable alterations in
muscle function. For example, presentation of a forward head (head juts
forward) and protracted (rounded) shoulders in static posture will
typically be related to dysfunction of the muscles that surround the
shoulder and neck areas and predictable patterns of muscle
imbalance.]{.mark}

[Three distortion patterns]{.underline}

[Basic compensatory patterns were studied and described by Janda (2002)
in the early 1970s. It is not to say that other compensations do not
occur; he simply suggested that there was a cascading effect of
deviations in static posture that would, more likely than not, present
themselves in a particular pattern.]{.mark}

[The three postural distortion patterns to be assessed during a static
postural assessment include the pes planus distortion syndrome
(developed by NASM) and the lower and upper crossed syndromes described
by Janda.]{.mark}

1.  [Pes planus distortion syndrome: Characterized by flat feet, knee
    valgus, and adducted and internally rotated hips]{.mark}

2.  [Lower crossed syndrome: Characterized by an anterior pelvic tilt
    and excessive lordosis (extension) of the lumbar spine]{.mark}

3.  [Upper crossed syndrome: Characterized by a forward head and
    protracted (rounded) shoulders]{.mark} Observing dynamic posture

[Posture is often viewed as being static (without movement), but
everyday posture is constantly changing to meet the demands placed on
the body. Thus, once completing a static postural assessment, movement
assessments (also known as dynamic postural assessments) should be
performed.]{.mark}

[The findings from the dynamic postural assessment should further
reinforce the observations made during the static postural assessment.
In addition, any issues not revealed during the static postural
assessment may be observed during the dynamic postural observations and
are often the quickest way to gain an overall impression of a client's
movement quality. Movement observations should relate to basic
functions, such as squatting, balancing, pushing, and pulling. The
observation process should search for any muscle imbalances or movement
impairment patterns that may possibly lead to injury, both in and out of
the fitness environment. With the limited time that most fitness
professionals have for observation, incorporating a systematic
assessment sequence is essential.]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[The faulty postures identified during a static postural assessment will
likely appear during a movement assessment, but the same cannot be said
in the opposite direction. When standing at rest, a client could have
observably perfect posture; however, when tasked to perform a movement
assessment, they may suddenly reveal movement impairments.]{.mark}

[Like a static postural assessment, movement assessments require
observation of the client's five kinetic chain checkpoints. Although
abnormal movement may be noticed at a specific joint, the cause of that
impairment may be coming from a lack of mobility or stability from an
adjacent region.]{.mark}

[For example, a client may display knee valgus while squatting, but the
cause of the movement impairment could be caused by hip or ankle
dysfunction (or both). Each joint region has a specific biomechanical
motion that it produces based on its own structure and function, as well
as the joints above and below it. When that specific motion deviates
from its normal path, it is considered a movement impairment and can be
used to presume possible muscle imbalance or joint dysfunction.]{.mark}

[It should be noted that the term *movement impairment* is simply being
used to describe a client's abnormal movement when it deviates from
optimal postural alignment while in motion. The fitness professional
should be careful how they explain these movement impairments to the
client to avoid embarrassing or discouraging them. Instead, the focus
should remain on helping the client move more safely and
efficiently.]{.mark}

**Overhead Squat Assessment**

[The overhead squat assessment (OHSA) is typically the first movement
assessment that is used for most clients. An individual's movement
quality during this assessment often provides valuable information about
what areas of the body need to be addressed through focused exercise
programming. The findings from this assessment can also serve as the
basis for all additional movement assessments.]{.mark}

[The overhead squat is designed to assess dynamic posture, core
stability, and neuromuscular control (i.e., coordination) of the whole
body during a squatting motion. Research suggests that the presence of
movement impairments during squatting motions is predictive of the risk
of musculoskeletal injuries in individuals who practice physical
exercise. Further, observational screening during the overhead squat is
a valid method to identify movement impairments, such as knee valgus and
limited ankle mobility.]{.mark}

[Recognizing movement impairments during the OHSA helps the fitness
professional identify their clients' muscle imbalances. Using this
information, the fitness professional can create an exercise program
that aims to correct these muscle imbalances by stretching identified
overactive muscles and strengthening identified underactive
muscles.]{.mark}

[OHSA Starting Position]{.underline}

1.  [The client stands on a flat, stable surface with the feet
    shoulder-width apart and pointing straight ahead.]{.mark}

2.  [The foot and ankle complex should be in a neutral position.]{.mark}

3.  [Ideally, the assessment should be performed with the shoes off to
    better view the client's foot and ankle complex.]{.mark}

4.  [The client should raise their arms completely overhead with elbows
    fully extended.]{.mark}

[OHSA Movement]{.underline}

1.  [The client should squat to a depth that brings the femur parallel
    to the ground (approximately chair height) and then return to the
    starting position. The squat depth can be reduced if the client has
    discomfort or is incapable of performing a squat to this
    depth.]{.mark}

2.  [The client will repeat the movement for approximately five
    repetitions, while the fitness professional views them from both the
    anterior and lateral vantage points.]{.mark}

[Anterior View]{.mark}

- [Feet: View the feet and knees from the front. The feet should remain
  pointed straight forward, as if the client is on snow skis. A common
  movement impairment is the feet externally rotating (turning
  out).]{.mark}

- [Knees: The client's knees should track straight forward and remain
  directly over the client's second and third toes. A common movement
  impairment is knee valgus (knees caving inward).]{.mark}

[Lateral View]{.mark}

- [View the LPHC and shoulders from the lateral view. Three common
  movement impairments observed from the lateral view include an
  excessive forward lean of the torso, an excessive low-back arch, or
  arms falling forward.]{.mark}

[Overactive muscles require stretching, whereas underactive muscles
require additional strengthening to help correct the muscle
imbalance.]{.mark}

+-------------------+----------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| **[View]{.mark}** | **[Kinetic Chain     | **[Movement          | **[Result]{.mark}** |
|                   | Checkpoint]{.mark}** | Impairment]{.mark}** |                     |
+:==================+:=====================+:=====================+:====================+
| [Anterior]{.mark} | [Feet/Ankles]{.mark} | [❑ Turn out]{.mark}  | [❑ Yes ❑ No]{.mark} |
|                   +----------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
|                   | [Knees]{.mark}       | [❑ Valgus (knock     | [❑ Yes ❑ No]{.mark} |
|                   |                      | knees)]{.mark}       |                     |
+-------------------+----------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| [Lateral]{.mark}  | [LPHC]{.mark}        | [❑ Forward lean of   | [❑ Yes ❑ No]{.mark} |
|                   |                      | trunk]{.mark}        |                     |
|                   +----------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
|                   | [LPHC]{.mark}        | [❑ Low-back          | [❑ Yes ❑ No]{.mark} |
|                   |                      | arches]{.mark}       |                     |
|                   +----------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
|                   | [Shoulders]{.mark}   | [❑ Arms fall         | [❑ Yes ❑ No]{.mark} |
|                   |                      | forward]{.mark}      |                     |
+-------------------+----------------------+----------------------+---------------------+

[CRITICAL]{.mark}

[The purpose of the OHSA is to observe a client's movement patterns and
identify movement impairments. These impairments indicate potential
muscle imbalances. To correct each muscle imbalance, it is important to
stretch the identified overactive muscles and strengthen the identified
underactive muscles.]{.mark}

[The overhead squat provides valuable information for the fitness
professional to program mobility and strengthening exercises that are
tailored to the client's needs. This is the main reason the OHSA is
recommended to screen a majority of clients during the first session and
then periodically to monitor progress. Poor performance on this
assessment can be discouraging for a new client, so fitness
professionals should remember to keep a positive approach to explaining
the benefits of addressing the various movement impairments a client may
display. This assessment also provides the foundation for other
assessments. The next lower-extremity assessment is the single-leg squat
assessment, which is also a good test for balance.]{.mark}

**Single-Leg Squat Assessment**

[The single-leg squat assessment evaluates dynamic posture,
lower-extremity strength, balance, and overall coordination in a
single-limb stance. This test should be used for clients who have
performed well in the OHSA, or if the fitness professional is
considering single-leg exercises in their programming (single-leg
squats, pistol squats, step-ups, etc.). This test is an effective
assessment of an individual's ability to balance, which is an important
functional consideration for activities of daily living and exercise
programming. This assessment should be avoided by clients who are at
risk for falls or loss of balance or who are recovering from a lower-
body injury.]{.mark}

[The single-leg squat assessment has been shown to have strong inter-
and intrareader reliability, meaning it can be evaluated consistently
over time and between multiple professionals. Further, like the OHSA,
observational screening during the single-leg squat is an accurate
method to identify movement impairments, such as knee valgus. The
single-leg squat is observed from the anterior view.]{.mark}

### Single-Leg Squat Starting Position

1.  [The client stands on a flat, stable surface, hands on the hips, and
    eyes focused forward.]{.mark}

2.  [The client lifts one foot approximately 6 in. off the floor. The
    stance foot, ankle and knee, and the LPHC should be in a neutral
    position and pointed straight ahead.]{.mark}

### Single-Leg Squat Movement

1.  [The client squats as deep as possible (while maintaining balance)
    and returns to the starting position. The depth of the single-leg
    squat will be client dependent and will likely vary across
    populations.]{.mark}

2.  [The client performs up to five repetitions before switching
    sides.]{.mark}

[Anterior View]{.mark}

- [The client's knee should track straight forward and remain directly
  over the client's second and third toes. A common movement impairment
  is knee valgus]{.mark}

[The single-leg squat assessment is much more challenging than the OHSA,
but it provides valuable information for the fitness professional about
the client's ability to balance on one leg.]{.mark}

+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| **[Joint]{.mark}**     | **[Movement                | **[Right or              |
|                        | Impairment]{.mark}**       | Left]{.mark}**           |
+:=======================+:===========================+:=========================+
| [Knee]{.mark}          | [❑ Valgus]{.mark}          | [❑ Right ❑ Left ❑        |
|                        |                            | Both]{.mark}             |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| [Note: Mark right, left, or both based on the stance limb tested.]{.mark}      |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

[This assessment also requires much more strength than the overhead
squat, which typically limits squat depth and stability. However, if the
fitness professional plans to program single-leg exercises, it is a good
idea to assess this pattern of movement first. As usual, fitness
professionals should remember to only use this test if clients are
stable enough to avoid falling or injuring themselves.]{.mark}

**Pushing assessment**

[The pushing assessment is an assessment that challenges the upper
extremities and trunk during a pushing movement. This type of assessment
can be completed prior to a workout session or as an integrated part of
the actual programming. The pushing assessment evaluates scapular and
shoulder mechanics and stability of the LPHC, cervical spine, and head.
The fitness professional should carefully evaluate all repetitions,
because the client may demonstrate movement impairments as they become
fatigued during the assessment.]{.mark}

[Pushing assessment starting position]{.underline}

1.  [The client should stand in a narrow, split stance with the toes
    pointing forward and handles in each hand.]{.mark}

2.  [The fitness professional should choose a resistance that will
    challenge (but not exhaust) the client while executing 10
    repetitions.]{.mark}

[If the client is not able to perform a standing chest press in a
narrow, split stance, use one of the following modifications:]{.mark}

- [Option 1: The client stands in a wider split stance. This testing
  position still assesses the upper extremity and cervical spine and
  head, but it decreases the challenge to the LPHC and the client's
  balance.]{.mark}

  [Option 2: The client performs a pushing movement seated in a
  machine.]{.mark}

### Pushing Assessment Movement

1.  [The fitness professional should instruct the client to push the
    handles away from their body and return to the starting
    position.]{.mark}

2.  [The client should use a slow repetition tempo.]{.mark}

3.  [The client should perform five repetitions in a split stance,
    switch legs, and then perform five additional repetitions.]{.mark}

[Lateral View]{.mark}

- [View the LPHC, shoulders, cervical spine, and head from the side. The
  lumbar and cervical spine should remain neutral while the shoulders
  stay level. Common movement impairments that may be observed include
  low-back arches, shoulder elevation, and head jutting forward.]{.mark}

  --------------------------- ------------------------- --------------
        [Kinetic Chain                [Movement            [Yes or
      Checkpoint]{.mark}         Impairment]{.mark}       No]{.mark}

         [LPHC]{.mark}               [❑ Low-back           [❑ Yes ❑
                                   arches]{.mark}         No]{.mark}

      [Shoulders]{.mark}            [❑ Shoulders           [❑ Yes ❑
                                   elevate]{.mark}        No]{.mark}

      [Head/Neck]{.mark}            [❑ Head juts           [❑ Yes ❑
                                   forward]{.mark}        No]{.mark}
  --------------------------- ------------------------- --------------

[The pushing assessment can easily be integrated into a typical workout
program, while providing useful information about the client's shoulder
mechanics and trunk stability during a pushing task. If the fitness
professional plans to program pushing exercises, it is a good idea to
assess this pattern of movement first.]{.mark}

**Pulling assessment**

[The pulling assessment is an assessment that challenges the upper
extremities and trunk during a pulling movement. This type of assessment
can be completed prior to a workout session or as an integrated part of
the actual programming. The pulling assessment evaluates upper-extremity
strength, as well as stability of the LPHC, cervical spine, and head.
Due to the narrow, split stance, this assessment also challenges the
individual's balance. The fitness professional should carefully evaluate
all repetitions, because the client may demonstrate movement impairments
as they become fatigued during the assessment.]{.mark}

[Pulling assessment start]{.underline}

1.  [The client should stand in a narrow, split stance with toes
    pointing forward and handles in each hand.]{.mark}

2.  [The fitness professional should choose a resistance that will
    challenge (but not exhaust) the client while executing 10
    repetitions.]{.mark}

[If the client is not able to perform a standing row in a narrow, split
stance, use one of the following modifications:]{.mark}

- [Option 1: The client stands in a wider split stance to increase their
  base of support. This testing position still assesses the upper
  extremity and cervical spine and head, but it decreases the challenge
  to the LPHC and the client's balance.]{.mark}

<!-- -->

- [Option 2: The client performs a pulling movement seated in a
  machine.]{.mark}

[Pulling assessment movement]{.underline}

- [The client should pull the handle toward their body and return to the
  starting position.]{.mark}

  [The client should use a slow repetition tempo.]{.mark}

  [The client should perform five repetitions in a split stance, switch
  legs, then perform five additional repetitions.]{.mark}

[Lateral View]{.mark}

- [View the LPHC, shoulders, cervical spine, and head from the side. The
  lumbar and cervical spine should remain neutral while the shoulders
  stay level. Common movement impairments that may be observed include
  low-back arches, shoulder elevation, and head jutting forward.]{.mark}

[The pulling assessment can easily be integrated into a typical workout
program, while providing useful information about the client's shoulder
mechanics and trunk stability during a pulling task. If the fitness
professional plans to program pulling exercises, it is a good idea to
assess this pattern of movement first.]{.mark}

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Kinetic Chain            **[Movement               **[Yes or
  Checkpoint]{.mark}**        Impairment]{.mark}**      No]{.mark}**
  --------------------------- ------------------------- --------------
  [LPHC]{.mark}               [❑ Low-back               [❑ Yes ❑
                              arches]{.mark}            No]{.mark}

  [Shoulders]{.mark}          [❑ Shoulders              [❑ Yes ❑
                              elevate]{.mark}           No]{.mark}

  [Head/Neck]{.mark}          [❑ Head juts              [❑ Yes ❑
                              forward]{.mark}           No]{.mark}
  --------------------------------------------------------------------

### Performance assessments

[Performance assessments are typically used for clients looking to
assess and improve athletic performance or specific fitness measures,
because these assessments will measure overall strength, muscular
endurance, power, and agility. However, the strength-based, performance
assessments can also be used with clients who have experience with
weight-lifting exercises and want to improve their strength in these
movements.]{.mark}

[To ensure these assessments are safe for clients, they should only be
implemented after thorough static postural and movement assessments are
completed. Further, it is important to determine if the client is ready
for weighted and dynamic movements before initiating any of these
assessments. Basic performance assessments include the
following:]{.mark}

- [Push-up test]{.mark}

- [Bench press strength assessment]{.mark}

- [Squat strength assessment]{.mark}

- [Vertical jump]{.mark}

- [Long (broad) jump]{.mark}

- [Lower extremity functional test (LEFT)]{.mark}

- [40-yard dash]{.mark}

- [Pro shuttle]{.mark}

**Push-up test**

[The push-up test measures muscular endurance of the upper extremities
during a pushing movement. The goal is to complete as many repetitions
as possible, with good form, usually for a predetermined length of time.
There are a variety of methods for performing this assessment, depending
on the population being tested (e.g., older adults, youths, military).
Below is information for a standard 60-second push-up test for
apparently healthy adults. This test can be completed prior to a workout
session or as an integrated part of the actual programming.]{.mark}

[[Push-up test position]{.underline}]{.mark}

1.  [The client should assume a push-up position with hands slightly
    outside of shoulder-width apart and elbows and knees fully extended
    and spine in a neutral position. If the client is not able to
    perform a standard push-up, the client can perform push-ups from a
    kneeling position.]{.mark}

[[Push-up test movement]{.underline}]{.mark}

1.  [The client lowers their body to achieve 90 degrees of elbow flexion
    before returning to the start position. They repeat this pattern for
    60 seconds or until exhaustion.]{.mark}

2.  [All repetitions completed to the appropriate depth should be
    counted during the 60-second testing period.]{.mark}

3.  [The client should be reassessed at regular intervals (e.g., 4 to 6
    weeks) to evaluate progress.]{.mark}

**Bench Press Strength assessment**

[The bench press strength assessment is designed to assess maximal
strength and estimate the one-rep maximum for the bench press exercise.
This test is considered an advanced assessment for strength-specific
goals and, as such, may not be suitable for all clients, especially
those with limited experience with resistance training. Generally
speaking, Certified Personal Trainers should not perform this assessment
for clients with general fitness or weight-loss goals.]{.mark}

[This assessment is most applicable for those seeking to assess their
maximal strength capabilities. A proper warm-up is encouraged before
beginning any maximal strength testing. Bench Press Strength Assessment
Position]{.mark}

1.  [The client should lay on their back on a weight-lifting
    bench.]{.mark}

2.  [The low-back should be in a neutral position (avoid excessive
    arching).]{.mark}

3.  [Both feet should be firmly planted on the ground.]{.mark}

4.  [A comfortable weight should be used for the warm-up and initial
    repetitions of the testing.]{.mark}

5.  [The client will grasp the barbell with their hands slightly greater
    than shoulder-width apart.]{.mark}

6.  [Proper spotting by the Certified Personal Trainer is required
    during the testing.]{.mark}

[[Bench Press Strength assessment movement]{.underline}]{.mark}

1.  [The client, with assistance from the fitness professional, should
    unrack the weighted barbell, lower it to their chest, and press it
    back into full elbow extension. After completing three repetitions,
    the weight should then be re-racked.]{.mark}

2.  [The client should take a 2-minute rest.]{.mark}

3.  [Ten to twenty pounds (or 5% to 10% of initial load) should be
    added.]{.mark}

4.  [The client should repeat steps 1 through 3 until they are no longer
    comfortable adding weight or cannot complete a minimum of three
    repetitions.]{.mark}

5.  [The one-rep maximum estimation chart in Appendix A should be used
    to calculate one-repetition max.]{.mark}

6.  [The client should be reassessed at regularly scheduled intervals to
    measure progress.]{.mark}

**Squat Strength assessment**

[The squat strength assessment is designed to estimate maximal strength
and the one-rep maximum for the squat exercise. This test is considered
an advanced assessment for strength-specific goals and, as such, may not
be suitable for all clients. Certified Personal Trainers should not
perform this assessment for clients with general fitness or weight-loss
goals, or those with limited experience performing resistance training.
This assessment is most applicable for those seeking to assess their
maximal strength capabilities. A proper warm-up is encouraged before
beginning any maximal strength testing.]{.mark}

[[Squat Strength assessment position]{.underline}]{.mark}

1.  [The client should stand with their feet approximately
    shoulder-width apart. The knees should be in line with the toes, and
    the low-back should be in a neutral position (avoid excessive
    arching). For safety reasons, it is important to avoid knee valgus
    during the duration of this assessment.]{.mark}

2.  [A comfortable weight should be used for the warm-up and initial
    repetitions of the testing. Clients should lower themselves under
    the racked barbell, placing it on their shoulders and grasping the
    barbell with their hands. Proper spotting by the Certified Personal
    Trainer is required during the testing.]{.mark}

[Squat Strength Assessment Movement]{.mark}

1.  [The client should unrack the weighted barbell and step away from
    the squat rack. The client should then lower into a squatting
    position and return to the starting position. After completing three
    repetitions, the weight should then be re-racked.]{.mark}

2.  [The client should take a 2-minute rest.]{.mark}

3.  [Thirty to 40 pounds (or 10% to 20% of initial load) should be
    added.]{.mark}

4.  [The client should repeat steps 1 through 3 until they are no longer
    comfortable adding weight or cannot complete a minimum of three
    repetitions.]{.mark}

5.  [The one-rep maximum estimation chart in Appendix A should be used
    to calculate the client's one-repetition max.]{.mark}

6.  [The client should be reassessed at regularly scheduled intervals to
    measure progress.]{.mark}

TRAINING TIP

[The squat and bench press strength assessments are not recommended for
most clients seeking weight loss or improvements in overall health.
These assessments are typically reserved for clients seeking
improvements in maximal strength, such as strength and power athletes
(e.g., football linemen, powerlifters, Olympic weightlifters).]{.mark}

[Moreover, these assessments are not required for determining
appropriate training loads (weight) during resistance training exercise
for the average weight-loss client. If the client has experience with
resistance training, the fitness professional should ask about the
weights they typically use and adjust accordingly. If the client does
not have experience with resistance training, the fitness professional
should use caution and select a relatively light weight that the client
can safely handle while learning the movement patterns. After a few
sessions, with some trial and error, appropriate training loads can be
determined. An appropriate training load is a weight that can be
performed for the desired number of repetitions with ideal form, with
the last few repetitions a struggle to complete.]{.mark}

**Vertical Jump assessment**

[The vertical jump assessment is designed to test maximal jump height
and lower-extremity power. There are several variations of the test;
however, the version discussed here requires the use of a Vertec
vertical jump tester. This test is considered an advanced assessment for
power and performance-specific goals and, as such, may not be suitable
for all clients. Generally speaking, Certified Personal Trainers should
not perform this assessment for clients with general fitness or
weight-loss goals. This test is most appropriate for clients with
athletic goals and seeking to assess lower-body power. A proper warm-up
is encouraged before beginning any maximal performance testing.]{.mark}

[Vertical Jump Assessment Position]{.mark}

1.  [The fitness professional should measure the standing reach of the
    client with one arm next to the Vertec.]{.mark}

2.  [The client should then stand in a ready position underneath the
    Vertec.]{.mark}

[Vertical Jump Assessment Movement]{.mark}

1.  [The client should jump and touch the highest possible vane. No
    stepping, of any kind, is allowed prior to the jump.]{.mark}

2.  [The height difference between the standing reach and jumping height
    is calculated. Red vanes are spaced 6 inches apart, blue vanes 1
    inch apart, and white vanes are spaced every 0.5 inches.]{.mark}

3.  [The client should take a 2-minute rest.]{.mark}

4.  [A second attempt should be provided. If the client increases their
    jump height on the second attempt, a third attempt is
    awarded.]{.mark}

5.  [The client should be reassessed at regularly scheduled intervals to
    measure progress.]{.mark}

**Long Jump assessment**

[The long jump assessment, also known as the broad jump, is designed to
test maximal jump distance and lower-extremity horizontal power. This
test is considered an advanced assessment for power and
performance-specific goals and, as such, may not be suitable for all
clients. Generally speaking, Certified Personal Trainers should not
perform this assessment for clients with general fitness or weight-loss
goals. This test is most appropriate for clients with athletic goals and
seeking to assess lower-body power. A proper warm-up is encouraged
before beginning any maximal performance testing.]{.mark}

[Long Jump Assessment Position]{.mark}

1.  [A tape measure should be extended along a nonslip surface, with a
    starting line marked with athletic tape.]{.mark}

2.  [The client should stand in a ready position behind the
    line.]{.mark}

[Long Jump Assessment Movement]{.mark}

1.  [The client should jump forward as far as possible. It should be a
    2-feet jump with a 2-feet landing. No stepping, of any kind, is
    allowed prior to or after the jump.]{.mark}

2.  [The jump distance should be measured from the starting line to the
    heels of the feet after landing.]{.mark}

3.  [The client should take a 2-minute rest.]{.mark}

4.  [A second attempt should be provided. If the client increases their
    jump distance on the second attempt, a third attempt is
    awarded.]{.mark}

5.  [The client should be reassessed at regularly scheduled intervals to
    measure progress.]{.mark}

**Lower extremity functional test**

[The lower extremity functional test (LEFT) is designed to test lateral
speed and agility. The LEFT is considered an advanced assessment for
speed and performance-specific goals and, as such, may not be suitable
for all clients. Generally speaking, Certified Personal Trainers should
not perform this assessment for clients with general fitness or
weight-loss goals. This test is most appropriate for clients with
athletic goals and seeking to assess speed and agility. A proper warm-up
is encouraged before beginning any maximal performance testing.]{.mark}

[LEFT Position]{.mark}

1.  [Two cones are spaced 10 yards (9.1 meters) apart on a nonslip
    surface.]{.mark}

2.  [The client should stand in a ready position behind cone
    one.]{.mark}

[LEFT Movement]{.mark}

1.  [The client should complete the following sequence as quickly as
    possible.]{.mark}

    - [Forward sprint to cone two.]{.mark}

      [Backpedal to cone one.]{.mark}

      [Side shuffle to cone two.]{.mark}

      [Side shuffle to cone one.]{.mark}

      [Carioca to cone two.]{.mark}

      [Carioca to cone one.]{.mark}

      [Forward sprint to cone two.]{.mark}

2.  [The timer should start at the first movement and end when the
    client runs past the final cone.]{.mark}

3.  [The client should be reassessed at regularly scheduled intervals to
    measure progress.]{.mark}

**36-metre Dash assessment**

[The 36-metre dash assessment is designed to test reaction capabilities,
acceleration, and maximal sprinting speed. The 36-metre dash assessment
is considered an advanced assessment for speed and performance-specific
goals and, as such, may not be suitable for all clients. In the US it is
called 40-yard dash assessment (40 yards are 36.6 metres).]{.mark}

[Certified Personal Trainers should not perform this assessment for
clients with general fitness or weight-loss goals. This test is most
appropriate for clients with athletic goals seeking to assess
straight-ahead sprinting speed. A proper warm-up is encouraged before
beginning any maximal performance testing.]{.mark}

[36-Metre Dash Assessment Position]{.mark}

1.  [Two cones are spaced 36 meters apart or use an American football
    field with clearly indicated yard lines.]{.mark}

2.  [The client should stand in a ready position behind cone
    one.]{.mark}

[36-Metre Dash Assessment Movement]{.mark}

1.  [The client should sprint as quickly as possible to the 36-metre
    marker.]{.mark}

2.  [The timer should start at the first movement and end when the
    client hits the 36-metre mark.]{.mark}

3.  [The client should be reassessed at regularly scheduled intervals to
    measure progress.]{.mark}

**Pro Shuttle assessment**

[The pro shuttle (5-10-5) assessment is designed to assess acceleration,
deceleration, agility, and control. This test is considered an advanced
assessment for speed and performance-specific goals and, as such, may
not be suitable for all clients. Generally speaking, Certified Personal
Trainers should not perform this assessment for clients with general
fitness or weight-loss goals. This test is most appropriate for clients
with athletic goals seeking to assess agility and sprinting speed. A
proper warm-up is encouraged before beginning any maximal performance
testing.]{.mark}

[Pro Shuttle Assessment Position]{.mark}

1.  [Two cones are spaced 9 metres apart, with a third cone in the
    middle (4.5 metres from other cones).]{.mark}

2.  [The client should stand in a ready position next to the middle
    cone.]{.mark}

3.  [The timer should stand facing the middle cone.]{.mark}

[Pro Shuttle Test Movement]{.mark}

1.  [The client should sprint as quickly as possible in the following
    pattern:]{.mark}

    - [Cone one to cone two]{.mark}

      [Cone two to cone three]{.mark}

      [Cone three to cone one]{.mark}

2.  [The timer should start at the first movement and end when the
    client passes the middle cone at the end of the sprint
    pattern.]{.mark}

3.  [The client should be reassessed at regularly scheduled intervals to
    measure progress.]{.mark}

### Implementing Fitness Assessments

[After implementing a thorough health screening, administering postural,
movement, and performance assessments provide an opportunity for fitness
professionals to establish a baseline for their client's functional
status. Since Certified Personal Trainers will work with a wide range of
clients, it is helpful to evaluate static and dynamic posture prior to
designing and implementing a fitness program to help provide insight to
the physical capabilities and limitations of the client. These
assessments will provide a baseline level of function as well as
postural and movement impairments that need to be corrected throughout
the programming. This information will also help inform the selection of
exercises and intensity at which an individual can perform. Lastly,
performing these assessments before implementing an exercise program
will provide a baseline from which to evaluate progress in static
posture, movement quality, and dynamic performance. The following list
describes the benefits of conducting and implementing fitness
assessments:]{.mark}

1.  [Assessing a client's static posture allows for a quick
    understanding of how they position their body during the
    day.]{.mark}

2.  [Movement and performance assessments demonstrate a baseline of the
    client's functional status in a wide range of tasks.]{.mark}

3.  [Movement assessments are helpful to identify and correct movement
    impairments and potential muscle imbalances.]{.mark}

4.  [Strength-based assessments allow the fitness professional to
    accurately assess a client's maximal strength capabilities.]{.mark}

5.  [Performance assessments allow for careful tracking of athletic
    performance (e.g., power, speed, agility, muscular
    endurance).]{.mark}

**Sequencing assessments**

[Certified Personal Trainers can use static postural and overhead squat
assessments as recruiting tools for prospective clients. By offering
these assessments, often complimentary, clients are more likely to
engage with the fitness professional and begin to build trust in their
expertise. The fitness professional can encourage the client by telling
them good things about their posture and movement, while also pointing
out any impairments that they can help correct with a focused exercise
program.]{.mark}

[For example, if a client agreed to participate in a complimentary OHSA,
the fitness professional may be able to identify a common pattern of
excessive knee valgus during the squat. The fitness professional could
then tell the client how they were impressed with their squat depth but
how important it is to maintain good alignment during the squat for
long-term knee health. This would then be a natural time to show some
simple modifications to their technique and explain how a focused
exercise plan, with proper supervision, could help the client to squat
more safely and effectively.]{.mark}

[Onboarding and sequencing assessments]{.underline}

[All movement assessments should begin with a standing, static postural
assessment. Any postural distortions can affect the length-tension of
muscles and increase stress on the body throughout a person's day. As a
result, it is important for the fitness professional to have confidence
in evaluating static standing posture, which will also serve as the
foundation for movement and performance assessments.]{.mark}

[Following a static postural assessment, the fitness professional should
implement an OHSA to evaluate dynamic posture, core stability, and
neuromuscular control. This assessment will begin to expose various
movement impairments that can be addressed with an individualized
fitness program. Further, a single-leg squat assessment can then be used
to test single-leg balance and challenge the client with a more
demanding movement.]{.mark}

[If the fitness professional has time, they can then implement
upper-extremity pushing and pulling assessments to gain more information
about how the client uses their upper body while stabilizing their
trunk. These tests can be administered prior to a workout session or as
an integrated part of the actual programming.]{.mark}

[As a group, static postural and movement assessments provide a good
overview about how the client positions and moves their body during
everyday tasks. Any postural distortions or movement impairments can
then be addressed with a focused exercise program, by stretching the
identified overactive muscles and strengthening the identified
underactive muscles.]{.mark}

[If the client complains of pain during any of the movement assessments,
further evaluation by a medical professional is recommended.]{.mark}

[It is not recommended to work with a client who is currently
experiencing pain without proper clearance and direction by their
physician.]{.mark}

[Lastly, when working with an athletic population, it may be appropriate
to implement various performance assessments. This is not common when
working with the general population, but it may be necessary to help a
client with athletic goals. These assessments can be selected based on
the movement demands of the client's sport. For example, a vertical jump
test is commonly used with basketball athletes, whereas the pro shuttle
is used with soccer athletes. These assessments help inform the exercise
program design and can be used to track progress over time.]{.mark}

[Sequencing all assessments]{.underline}

[It is important for all assessments to be sequenced in a specific order
to help guarantee accurate results. For example, the fitness
professional should always begin the assessments process with a
preparticipation health screening (PAR-Q+, health history
questionnaire), physiological (resting heart rate and blood pressure),
and body composition (BMI, circumference, body fat percentage)
assessments prior to performing assessments that require physical
exertion. Physical exertion can skew the results of these
assessments.]{.mark}

[Once these assessments have been completed, the next step is to perform
static postural and movement assessments. Lastly, cardio (aerobic/VT1
and anaerobic/VT2) tests and performance assessments can be
administered. The fitness professional should choose to perform cardio
and performance assessments on separate days to ensure the client's
energy levels are fresh to maximize accuracy of these
assessments.]{.mark}

[However, performance assessments that cause little fatigue (e.g.,
vertical jump test, horizontal jump test) can be administered prior to
cardio tests if sufficient rest periods are provided. If an exercise
program is properly designed by the Certified Personal Trainer, the
client should experience improvement in each assessment over
time.]{.mark}

**Opportunity for rapport building**

[Many clients come into the gym or training centre intimidated by all
the equipment and lacking knowledge about how to properly create
exercise programs. They may also be fearful that they will become
injured or push too hard during an exercise session. In these cases,
postural, movement, and performance assessments are excellent tools for
building trust and rapport with current and potential clients. These
assessments, when implemented with confidence and compassion, can
display a high level of expertise by the fitness professional and help a
Certified Personal Trainer stand out among the competition. They also
open the door for the fitness professional to discuss potential movement
impairments and opportunities for improvements in posture and movement.
Further, they help the fitness professional to carefully design an
exercise program that is uniquely individualized for each and every
client. With regular practice, these assessments will provide a roadmap
for the development and execution of quality fitness programs.]{.mark}

**Reassessment**

[Postural, movement, and performance assessments provide an important
baseline from which to measure progress. Fitness professionals should
carefully document the findings from these assessments to be referred to
at a later time. Depending on the environment and client's training
schedule, it is recommended to reassess the client every month, or
quarterly, to measure the progress they have gained from staying
consistent with their fitness plan. The following are a few positive
reasons to reassess clients on a regular basis:]{.mark}

1.  [It provides positive encouragement to clients and serves as a
    helpful reminder for them to continue working hard toward the goals
    they have set.]{.mark}

2.  [It helps clients realize how the exercise programming provided by
    their Certified Personal Trainer is making a difference in their
    fitness level, which helps foster adherence to the exercise
    program.]{.mark}

3.  [It provides an opportunity for fitness professionals to refine or
    progress exercises as their clients' abilities improve.]{.mark}

**Considerations and modifications**

[Due to the wide range of clients a fitness professional will work with,
it is important to recognize and implement assessment modifications for
certain populations with movement restrictions or safety concerns. The
fitness professional should always use caution when implementing
movement and performance assessments and only progress them once the
client demonstrates the ability to perform advanced movements.]{.mark}

[For example, if during the OHSA the client seems very unstable or
lacking enough strength to smoothly lower and raise from the squat, it
would not be a good idea to progress them to a single-leg squat. The
fitness professional may instead choose to implement the pulling and
pushing assessments. However, rather than requiring a narrow, split
stance during the pulling and pushing assessments, it might be better to
use a seated chest press or rowing machine to limit the balance
challenge of the task. They key is to make sure that clients are
comfortable and safe during the assessments, especially if they have any
conditions that may limit full participation in the various
assessments.]{.mark}

**Overweight and obese clients**

[Prior to working with overweight and obese populations, a thorough
preparticipation health screening must be completed. Also, note that
overweight and obese clients show a large spectrum of abilities, from
highly functional and strong to significantly limited in their movement
quality and confidence. Fitness professionals should not make
assumptions about anyone's ability, but rather use the results from a
systematic postural and movement assessment to help inform their
approach. Standing postural assessments may be more challenging due to
the amount of body mass that covers bony landmarks, but this will still
be the first step in the assessment process. Next, an OHSA should be
used to evaluate whole body movement and stability. If the overweight or
obese client appears unstable or at risk of falling, a modified overhead
squat with reduced range of motion can be used instead. If the
overweight or obese client performs confidently and is stable in the
overhead squat, a single-leg squat may be helpful to evaluate balance,
but it is not necessary and depends on the fitness professional's
evaluation.]{.mark}

[Performance assessments are also not necessary for many overweight or
obese clients, as these clients are typically seeking to improve body
composition and health measures, not athletic performance. Assessment
considerations for overweight and obese clients include the
following:]{.mark}

1.  [Ensure a thorough preparticipation health screening is
    completed.]{.mark}

2.  [Avoid making assumptions about the overweight or obese client's
    ability, and instead, allow results from posture and movement
    screening to help determine their functional status.]{.mark}

3.  [Consider limiting movements that require an overweight or obese
    client to get on and off the ground.]{.mark}

[Assessment modification options for overweight and obese clients
include the following:]{.mark}

1.  [Consider modifying the overhead squat with a reduced squat
    depth.]{.mark}

2.  [Skip the single-leg squat for overweight and obese clients, unless
    they show adequate strength and stability during the OHSA.]{.mark}

3.  [Perform pushing and pulling assessments in a standing position or
    with the use of machines for improved stability and comfort.]{.mark}

**Youth clients**

[With increased use of technology and long hours seated in classroom
environments, even youth clients will present with postural distortions.
As a result, static postural assessments are recommended and should be
performed before movement assessments. Overhead squat, single-leg squat,
pushing, and pulling assessments should also be used to determine the
client's functional status and movement quality. In many cases, movement
impairments for youth are the result of limited strength and poor motor
control.]{.mark}

[Youth clients can benefit from performance assessments, especially if
the child plays sports. The most important things to consider, however,
are the youth's maturity level and goals. Is the youth seeking weight
loss or improved athletic performance? This information will determine
the most appropriate assessments to conduct. Note that one-repetition
maximum tests (bench press and squat) would not be appropriate for most
youth clients. Instead, select muscular endurance and cardiovascular
assessments, unless measuring absolute strength is vitally important for
the child's goals and the child has the maturity level and exercise
experience to handle such assessments.]{.mark}

[Assessment considerations for youth include the following:]{.mark}

1.  [The OHSA should be used to begin learning about the youth client's
    functional abilities and to determine if they are ready for the
    single-leg squat assessment.]{.mark}

2.  [Assumptions about the youth client's ability should be avoided, and
    instead, results from postural and movement screenings should be
    used to help determine their functional status.]{.mark}

3.  [Youth clients should typically not be challenged with maximum
    strength testing due to their developmental stage of life and lack
    of maturity needed for such assessments.]{.mark}

4.  [Many movement impairments will be the result of a lack of strength
    or motor control in the youth populations.]{.mark}

[Assessment modification options for youth include the
following:]{.mark}

1.  [Implementation of muscular endurance assessments should be
    considered instead of maximum strength testing.]{.mark}

2.  [Performance assessments, such as the push-up test, LEFT, and pro
    shuttle assessment, may be a fun way to keep youth clients engaged,
    while also testing their muscular endurance, power, and
    agility.]{.mark}

**Older adult clients**

[Preparticipation health screening should be conducted for older adult
clients prior to any other assessments. Once it is determined that the
individual can safely proceed, the goal of the assessment process is to
determine the older adult's functional status. Some of the typical
movement assessments may need to be modified for this population. After
a static postural assessment, a modified OHSA (limited range of motion)
may need to be administered. In many cases, a single-leg squat test is
not safe for this population, unless the client displays remarkably good
strength and stability during the OHSA. Upper-extremity pushing and
pulling assessments should typically be performed in a standing position
with light resistance from a cable pulley or seated in a machine.
Performance assessments are typically not appropriate for older adult
clients unless they are an athlete and have specific athletic goals.
Assessment considerations for older adults include the
following:]{.mark}

1.  [A thorough preparticipation health screening should be completed
    prior to further testing.]{.mark}

2.  [Assumptions about the older adult's ability should be avoided, and
    instead, results from postural and movement screenings should be
    used to help determine their functional status.]{.mark}

3.  [Movements that require senior clients to get on and off the ground
    may need to be limited depending on the client's functional
    status.]{.mark}

4.  [The assessment process should be started conservatively and then
    progress to more challenging movements based on the client's goals
    and abilities.]{.mark}

[Assessment modification options for older adults include the
following:]{.mark}

1.  [The overhead squat may need to be modified with a reduced squat
    depth.]{.mark}

2.  [The single-leg squat for older adult clients should be skipped,
    unless they show exceptional strength and stability during the
    OHSA.]{.mark}

3.  [Pushing and pulling assessments should be performed in a standing
    position or with the use of machines for improved stability and
    comfort.]{.mark}

**Prenatal clients**

[The types of assessments performed for prenatal clients depend on their
goals and stage of pregnancy. The most important assessment for a
prenatal client is a preparticipation health screening. Medical
clearance, prior to exercise, by the client's physician is also
recommended. It is presumably safe to perform most assessments with
prenatal clients in their first trimester. However, precautions must be
made for clients in their second and third trimesters. Performance
assessments are likely not necessary for prenatal clients, unless the
client is an athlete with medical clearance to continue vigorous
exercise. In all cases, prone and supine positions should be avoided for
prenatal clients in their second and third trimesters; instead, opt for
seated or standing assessments. Assessment considerations for prenatal
clients include the following:]{.mark}

1.  [Thorough preparticipation health screening and medical clearance
    should be obtained prior to further testing.]{.mark}

2.  [Assumptions about a prenatal client's ability should be avoided,
    and instead, results from postural and movement screenings should be
    used to help determine her functional status.]{.mark}

3.  [The prenatal client's concerns about movements or activities should
    be noted, and she should not be forced into any assessments that she
    is not comfortable with.]{.mark}

4.  [Movements that require a prenatal client to get on and off the
    ground should be limited.]{.mark}

5.  [The assessment process should start conservatively and then
    progress to more challenging movements based on the prenatal
    client's goals and abilities.]{.mark}

6.  [Prone and supine positions should be avoided for prenatal clients
    in their second and third trimesters.]{.mark}

[Assessment modification options for prenatal clients include the
following:]{.mark}

1.  [The overhead squat may need to be modified with a reduced squat
    depth, especially for clients in their second or third
    trimesters.]{.mark}

2.  [Skipping the single-leg squat assessment is recommended for
    prenatal clients.]{.mark}

3.  [Pushing and pulling assessments should be performed in a standing
    position or with the use of machines for improved stability and
    comfort.]{.mark}
