# The role of psychology in fitness and wellness

[The role of psychology in fitness and wellness is extremely important.
It can deal with several topics, including the way exercise
participation affects someone's mood in both the short and the long
term, the effect of weight loss on self-esteem, the motivations to
become physically active, and how social influences affect overall
exercise behaviour. One of the most important things about psychology
and its relationship with fitness and wellness is the role it plays in
the behavioural change process. Since an alarming number of people don't
participate in regular physical activity, there is an ongoing need for
interventions that address behavioural change, specifically in helping
people transition from a sedentary lifestyle to an active one.]{.mark}

[Generally speaking, psychology influences the decision to either be
physically active or not active on any given day. People must value and
prioritize exercise in the midst of busy lifestyles, including demands
from family, work, and other competing interests, such as leisure time.
Exercise participation is influenced by several factors, including
motivation, goals, barriers, self-confidence, and a variety of social
influences. When working with someone who is new to exercise or
returning to exercise, behavioural change can be guided by the fitness
professional finding out why these clients want to participate now and
what has stopped them in the past. Uncovering this information will help
ensure an exercise program can be tailored to the specific needs of each
client, with an additional understanding of the challenges faced by
clients regarding exercise adherence.]{.mark}

[The role of psychology can also extend to some clinical issues, such as
exercise addiction or poor body image issues associated with eating
disorders, which are beyond the scope of practice for a Certified
Personal Trainer. Overall, fitness professionals can better serve their
clients by using many tools related to psychology. In particular,
excellent communication skills should be practiced, because both
listening and explaining are critically important in making sure that an
accurate exchange of information has taken place.]{.mark}

[STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE]{.mark}

[Communication is a very important aspect of psychology; the right
questions need to be asked and answers need to be heard. Other important
aspects of communication are nonverbal cues, which can include body
language, body position, overall appearance, eye contact, tone of voice,
facial expressions, and gestures. Nonverbal cues are very powerful
because if a person's nonverbal cues indicate that they are not
interested or are bored or defensive, regardless of what is being said,
then it is likely that a message hasn't been effectively conveyed or
received.]{.mark}

**The science of psychology**

[Psychology is an area of science that focuses on people; in particular,
it is focused on how the mind and feelings may influence different
behaviours. Psychology examines the relationships between brain
functionality and human behaviour and the environmental effect on
behaviour. The people who specialize in the science of psychology are
either psychologists or psychiatrists. These licensed individuals are
highly educated and trained to observe behaviours, listen to patients,
and help people adjust their behaviours or cope with a variety of
situations.]{.mark}

[Psychologists and psychiatrists are employed in many areas such as the
healthcare industry, educational settings, counselling, law enforcement,
and even athletics. They can work as consultants to different industries
with an interest in human behaviour, or with individuals struggling with
mental health issues such as depression or anxiety, or an athlete who
has difficulty focusing. All fitness professionals need to remain within
their scope of practice; they should not attempt to diagnose, assess, or
analyse an individual with mental illness as only a qualified medical
professional can do, such as a psychologist or psychiatrist. However,
some aspects of psychology may be helpful when working with people who
are trying to change behaviours. Having a firm understanding of a
client's concerns and reasons for wanting to exercise will go a long way
toward providing excellent service to clients.]{.mark}

[GETTING TECHNICAL]{.mark}

[Psychologists and psychiatrists have similar duties, because both
professionals are focused on counselling individuals with mental
illness. The main difference is the type of education obtained by each
professional and the ability to prescribe medications. Depending on the
country, psychologists have earned at minimum a master's degree and, in
most cases, a doctorate and can assess patients with mental illness, but
they are limited to treating with psychotherapy in most cases. By
contrast, a psychiatrist has a medical degree, is trained in general
medicine, and has completed a four-year residency in psychiatry. After
obtaining a medical degree, a psychiatrist can also prescribe
medications in addition to administering psychotherapy.]{.mark}

[There are countless subtopics within the field of psychology including
clinical, developmental, social, health, and sport and exercise
psychology. Sport and exercise psychology focuses on aspects such as
understanding participants' motives and barriers to physical activity,
ways the environment affects exercise behaviour, social influences on
exercise, psychological benefits of exercise, and the psychological
factors that affect long-term exercise adherence. Applying some of the
psychological principles associated with successful behavioural change
will help clients adjust to a more active lifestyle.]{.mark}

[CRITICAL]{.mark}

[Fitness professionals should be aware of the psychological variables
that affect behavioural change, such as motivation and social influence,
but should never attempt to counsel individuals with mental disorders.
Only trained and licensed healthcare professionals (e.g., physicians,
psychiatrists, psychologists) are qualified to treat these
individuals.]{.mark}

**Motivation**

[In the context of psychology and behavioural change, motivation is a
term used to describe the intensity and direction of someone's effort,
whereas *intensity* refers to the amount of effort expended, and
*direction* refers to whether or not someone seeks out a behaviour. In
general, individuals who seek out a certain behaviour typically put
forth an effort toward success, therefore intensity and direction are
often related. For example, if someone has a strong desire to lose
weight, they will be drawn toward behaviours, such as regular exercise
and diet modification, and will likely put forth an intense effort to
achieve results.]{.mark}

[Understanding the motivation to exercise is an area of interest for
most fitness professionals, because it allows for a personalized
approach when coaching clients toward their goals. Research has shown
that motives differ between populations. For example, men and women tend
to have different motivations to exercise than do younger versus older
adults. Differences in motivation may also be observed based on culture,
socioeconomic status, or the surrounding environment. It is important to
assess motivation on an individual basis because it can vary greatly.
Also, motivation is a dynamic variable, meaning it can change both in
the short and the long term.]{.mark}

[Someone may start an exercise program to lose weight, but as
participation continues, the motives may shift to include reducing
stress, increasing strength, or developing camaraderie with other
exercisers. Motivation can also change abruptly based on receiving
information, such as a newly revealed health concern, or an upcoming
event like a wedding or family reunion. Sometimes motivation comes
instantaneously from the fitness professional; for example, if a client
is feeling tired and therefore not putting in a typical effort, words of
encouragement from the fitness professional can inspire motivation to
increase intensity and effort.]{.mark}

[When people are not motivated to do something, it is referred to as
amotivation. When people are amotivated to exercise, they may not
participate at all, or they will participate by only going through the
motions without any intensity or belief in the positive outcomes that
exercise may yield. For example, some clients may be exercising only
because a significant other or a physician said they must be more
active, otherwise they are amotivated to exercise. In such in-stances,
it is important to dig deeper to try and help the client realize the
value in participating, or at least believe in possible outcomes, to
help establish some motive that can be used as a building block.]{.mark}

[When comparing active and inactive people, it's not surprising that a
mixture of motives exists with active individuals, who tend to be more
motivated by physical fitness, improved psychological health, enjoyment,
appearance, mastery of skills, and social interactions. With the
knowledge that active individuals have a variety of motives, fitness
professionals can help clients determine their personal motivations
about exercise and help shape their exercise program.]{.mark}

[When learning about a client's motivations, a fitness professional
should be aware of two categories: (1) extrinsic motivation and (2)
intrinsic motivation. People are not motivated exclusively by one or the
other and will likely have motives represented by each. Either way, it
is important to understand the difference between the two and when they
may overlap.]{.mark}

[Extrinsic motivation]{.underline}

[Extrinsic motivation focuses on doing an activity for some type of
recognition, such as earning a trophy or award; it relies on looking
forward to something if a specific behaviour is achieved. Rewards can be
large or small but should match the achievement. For example, exercising
3 days a week for 1 month could be rewarded with a new pair of shoes,
whereas completing a marathon that required months of training might be
rewarded with a vacation.]{.mark}

[Extrinsic motivation to exercise may come in the form of social
recognition, rewards from competitions, or the improvement of physical
appearance. Achieving rewards brings about a sense of satisfaction that
may not come from the day-to-day exercise routine. The concern with an
emphasis on extrinsic motivation is that it may not sustain exercise
adherence because once a reward is achieved, there may not be any
further incentive to continue, therefore long-term exercise
participation will likely be associated with some level of intrinsic
motivation.]{.mark}

[Intrinsic motivation]{.underline}

[Intrinsic motivation has received more attention because it relates to
long-term exercise adherence; it is described as the motivation that
comes from within a person. In contrast to extrinsic motivation, it is
not about rewards but more about pursuing activities that are
interesting or meaningful to that individual. Intrinsically motivated
individuals enjoy the process and see value in the journey. People who
are intrinsically motivated to exercise likely enjoy being physically
active and appreciate all the physical and psychological benefits that
exercise can bring. Intrinsic motivation may include exercising for
stress relief, increasing energy, and finding new ways to be challenged
physically.]{.mark}

[This type of motivation has also been associated with people who
strongly identify with exercise, where there is a satisfaction that
comes from regular participation. Individuals who are intrinsically
motivated to exercise will likely experience some enjoyment with regular
participation, which may be due to a genetic predisposition toward
intrinsic motivation. Also, for intrinsic motivation to occur, people
need to have knowledge and some ability to make choices about how to
proceed. It has been demonstrated that when people are engaged in the
process of changing their behaviours, they are more successful in
achieving outcomes.]{.mark}

[For example, a physical activity intervention revealed that individuals
who were specifically exposed to information on intrinsic motivation
were more active and more intrinsically motivated after 12 months
compared with a group who received standardized information.
Additionally, when individuals were guided to identify the importance of
exercise for them and their confidence in their abilities to exercise,
they were enabled to choose tailored exercise plans to be physically
active. Further, they remained more active over time compared to a group
that was not provided the same level of interaction.]{.mark}

[GETTING TECHNICAL]{.mark}

[Intrinsic motivation is strongly rooted in the self-determination
theory, which is a commonly used theory of behavioural change. It
proposes that people will implement change when they feel (1) competent,
which is mastering tasks or skills; (2) a sense of belonging to other
people, which is referred to as relatedness; and (3) a sense of
autonomy, which is feeling a sense of control over their actions and
goals.]{.mark}

[There are situations when motives are both extrinsic and intrinsic.
Some examples include times when individuals are extrinsically motivated
to avoid failure but the desire to avoid failure is related to their
overall self-esteem or when individuals want to lose weight because they
know they will be healthier and feel more energized. Regardless of the
reason(s) why someone is motivated to exercise, it is crucial to
understand individual motives, and reassess motives over time, to
provide a tailored program that continues to meet the needs of the
client.]{.mark}

[HELPFUL HINT]{.mark}

[When trying to differentiate between the two types of motivation, just
remember that intrinsic motivation is something that comes from within
and is considered internal to a person. Extrinsic motivation is
something that is external to the person.]{.mark}

### 

[Understanding how motivation differs]{.underline}

[Motivation to exercise will be unique to everyone; however,
understanding how motivation may differ for certain demographics may be
useful when establishing and growing a client base. While there are
always exceptions, younger adults tend to be motivated by competitive
situations, a feeling of being part of a social group, or the
improvement of physical appearance. As people age, motives shift toward
more health-related variables such as lowering blood pressure or
avoiding other chronic health conditions.]{.mark}

[Motivation also plays a role in the types of exercise that people seek
out: extrinsically motivated people seek opportunities that emphasize
physical transformation or competition, and intrinsically motivated
people tend to seek opportunities focused on health and wellness.
Therefore, learning what motivates individuals will go a long way toward
providing them with the opportunities they prefer, which will ultimately
lead to client satisfaction.]{.mark}

[STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE]{.mark}

[Helping clients determine their motivation to exercise can go beyond
simply asking them why they want to participate. Validated surveys are
available that can be distributed to help clients objectively identify
motives. One of these surveys is the Exercise Motivation Inventory-2.
This survey identifies 14 subscales of possible motives with higher
scores on any given motive indicating its potential importance to an
individual. The Exercise Motivation Inventory-2 survey can be found by
performing a quick internet search. It is designed for exercisers and
nonexercisers alike, making it ideal for new and existing clients.
Another benefit of using an objective scale is that it will be easier to
reassess motives over time, since motivation to exercise may change for
some people. Tracking these changes will help fitness professionals
adjust their personal programs.]{.mark}

## Common barriers to exercise

[Despite the overwhelming evidence showing that regular exercise is
associated with many physical and psychological benefits, barriers to
participation are often cited by sedentary or infrequently active
individuals. Barriers to exercise are common for nearly everyone at one
time or another due to busy lifestyles that include family
responsibilities, work obligations, and social commitments. In fact,
barriers are often in direct competition with motivations to exercise. A
barrier is anything that prevents someone's ability to exercise, whether
it is a one-time or regular occurrence.]{.mark}

[Some barriers are physical, such as illness, injury, lack of
transportation, or a lack of a safe place to exercise. Other barriers
are based in perception, such as the belief of not having enough time or
energy to exercise. People with perception barriers may feel like they
are physical, and in some situations they can be (e.g., a single parent
balancing a career and raising children), but many can be addressed with
better time-management skills and setting a daily priority on
health.]{.mark}

[The role of the fitness professional is to help clients determine their
personal barriers and help them strategize ways to overcome them.
Clients also need to have a plan to deal with unexpected barriers that
may occur, such as needing to stay late at work, forgetting to pack
workout attire, or not having childcare. Barriers will be a constant
battle for some, so helping clients determine their personal barriers
and how to overcome them will help with overall exercise
adherence.]{.mark}

[Barriers will also change as people age and as responsibilities shift.
For example, young adults may not have children or significant job
responsibilities; as people age, demands on their time may shift after
having children and taking on more responsibilities at work. Women, in
particular, have indicated that parenthood is a major barrier to
exercise; its significance grew along with an increasing number of
children. By contrast, older adults may be facing barriers such as
health issues, availability of appealing facilities, and cost of
participation. Fitness professionals should check in frequently with
their clients to reassess barriers and strategize ways to overcome
them.]{.mark}

**Time**

[Time is often cited as a barrier against many healthy behaviours,
including exercise, proper food intake, and overall stress management.
Balancing work, family, social obligations, healthy eating, and regular
exercise comes as a challenge for most people. Fitness professionals can
help individuals manage their time by finding ways to prioritize
exercise. It is often stated that everyone has the same 24 hours in a
day and that exercise simply needs to be a higher priority. While this
is technically true, it is helpful to assess exactly how time is spent
and determine the amount of physical activity that can realistically
occur when setting attainable goals and managing expectations for
results.]{.mark}

[Time is often a top barrier to exercise, which is evident among adults
of all ages. When someone is new to exercise, finding time to
participate on a regular basis is one of the toughest challenges,
especially when other activities may have to be limited. People have
competing interests, and oftentimes, they find value in doing something
other than exercise. For example, most people value their jobs because
their job provides the income they need to sustain their lifestyle;
therefore, time spent working is easily justified. Many individuals also
have responsibilities to a significant other or children, or they
provide care for other family members. Additionally, people value their
social interactions and time spent simply relaxing.]{.mark}

[One way to overcome the perceived barrier of a lack of time is to help
clients address their approach to time management. Some ways to reclaim
time for exercise can include rearranging schedules so that exercise
becomes more of a priority. Committing to exercise as the first activity
in the morning or immediately after work is one way for clients to put
exercise ahead of competing activities. The fitness professional should
help clients identify areas of life where there is no room for adjusting
the schedule and then design a program that maximizes a client's real
ability to commit. When lack of time continues to be a barrier to
physical activity, overall goals and the timeline to reach those goals
need to be reassessed.]{.mark}

[TRAINING TIP]{.mark}

[Whenever clients are unsure about their specific barriers, ask them to
keep a log of how their time is spent over the course of a week. This
will help identify their average sleep patterns and time dedicated to
working, childcare, household chores, meal preparation, exercise, and
leisure activities, such as watching television, spending time on a
computer, reading, or just relaxing. By seeing a snapshot of an average
week, it becomes easier to identify areas of improvement for time
management so that priorities like exercise are always on the
schedule.]{.mark}

**Unrealistic goals**

[Setting goals is an important aspect of working with clients so that
expectations are both realistic and somewhat challenging. New exercisers
often fall into the trap of setting unrealistic goals and then becoming
frustrated when goals are not met. Unrealistic goals can be anything
from expecting to see extreme weight loss results in a short amount of
time to completing a marathon before even attempting a 5K race. Goals
need to have some flexibility so that adjustments can be made based on
progress. Additionally, they need to be progressive so that smaller
achievements along the way can help guide the client toward long-term
goals.]{.mark}

[When goals are unrealistic, they can become a barrier by causing
frustration and disappointment. Young males indicated unrealistic goals
were a barrier to exercise due to perceived expectations of a young
male's physical ability. For example, if they attempt to exhibit a
certain level of fitness and do not succeed, then goals are viewed as
unrealistic, and they give up. If an individual believes that they are
not making sufficient progress, the exerciser may start to feel defeated
and eventually discontinue the practice of exercise. The fitness
professional has the expertise to assist clients with setting realistic
outcome goals, such as appropriate body fat reduction or strength
increases, but it is also important to set realistic and achievable
process goals, like being physically active for a certain number of days
per week or reaching a certain number of active minutes each
day.]{.mark}

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Goal          **[Example]{.mark}**
  Type]{.mark}**   
  ---------------- ---------------------------------------------------
  [Outcome         [Place in top 10 in a 10K race]{.mark}
  goal]{.mark}     

  [Process         [Jog for 45 minutes, starting at 6:30 a.m.
  goal]{.mark}     Monday--Friday]{.mark}
  --------------------------------------------------------------------

[Goals can become unrealistic when they are not objective, when too many
goals are set at one time, when goals are not adjusted, and when people
are forced to set goals. These pitfalls can be avoided by setting
specific goals and avoiding vague statements like "get more fit" or "be
more active." When people are new to goal setting, fitness professionals
should limit them to one to two short-term goals in the beginning. Also,
they should explain to clients that adjusting goals, both up and down,
is part of the process, so that changes are not viewed as failures.
Finally, they should not force clients to set goals if they are
resistant. Helping clients set realistic goals will go a long way toward
setting them up for success.]{.mark}

**Lack of social support**

[Social support refers to the intentional actions taken by people to
assist others in achieving a specific behaviour. A lack of social
support can make it difficult for some people to participate in regular
exercise, depending on the types of support that they need. People who
do not have support may not be able to overcome other barriers to
exercise, or they simply cannot participate regularly. Individuals
without social support may lack the following advantages:]{.mark}

- [Encouragement to participate in exercise]{.mark}

- [Someone who can discuss the challenges of exercise]{.mark}

- [Transportation to a fitness facility]{.mark}

- [The ability to find accurate information on health and
  fitness]{.mark}

- [An exercise partner.]{.mark}

**Social physique anxiety**

[Social physique anxiety is when individuals feel anxiety about their
physical appearance or are insecure about how they look to others or how
they believe others perceive their body. Fitness facilities are places
where individuals who have never felt anxious about their appearance
might suddenly feel physically inadequate. Reasons for this issue may be
due to the social comparison they believe is taking place or the
specific attire that many people wear during exercise, including
tight-fitting clothes and/or clothing with minimal coverage.]{.mark}

[Individuals with social physique anxiety may make comments similar to
the following statements:]{.mark}

- [I'll start working out when I lose a little weight.]{.mark}

- [I would work out, but I don't have anything comfortable to
  wear.]{.mark}

- [I feel self-conscious working out in front of people.]{.mark}

- [I feel like everyone is staring at me.]{.mark}

[Any comments that suggest a person's discomfort with the way they may
be viewed may indicate some level of social physique anxiety.]{.mark}

[Social physique anxiety may prove a difficult barrier to overcome
because it can also be related to body image issues. Some ways to
overcome this barrier include matching clients to types of exercise that
can be done outside of a fitness facility or using discreet areas of a
facility to train clients. It should also be emphasized that clients
should wear comfortable clothing and that activities that require
specific attire, such as swimming or water aerobics, are
optional.]{.mark}

[It is known that, in general, women experience higher levels of social
physique anxiety compared to men; however, men experience some level of
it as well. Social physique anxiety has also been found to be lower with
individuals who have a lower body mass index. When social physique
anxiety is a barrier to exercise, fitness professionals should make an
effort to provide alternative ways to participate and use care when
integrating individuals into more mainstream options.]{.mark}

**Convenience**

[Convenience in life is something that nearly everyone prefers, and
convenience to exercise is no different. Most people will avoid an
inconvenient activity, whether the inconvenience includes the time it
will take, the distance to get there, the attire that is required, or
the cost to participate. For example, if a fitness facility is located
on the way to or from work, it may be viewed as convenient; however,
other factors should be considered if people are exercising before work,
such as locker rooms or proximity to home. Convenience will be
subjective, meaning that two people may view the same factor in
different ways. Driving 5 miles to a facility may not bother one person,
whereas someone else may see it as highly inconvenient and, therefore, a
barrier.]{.mark}

[Many clients will travel for what they view as exceptional experiences
such as a specialty group exercise class, clean facilities with current
equipment, or the ability to work with a specific fitness professional.
One way to help clients overcome this barrier is to provide excellent
customer service, which includes individualized exercise programming.
Another way to help clients maximize their physical activity is to help
them identify ways for them to exercise at home, during a lunch hour, or
in between other responsibilities. The bottom line is that there are
always options available to make exercise possible for those who want to
participate.]{.mark}

**Ambivalence**

[Ambivalence happens when someone has mixed feelings about a situation.
There is usually a positive and negative component to the way something
is perceived. When it comes to exercise, people may believe that it is
an overall good idea, but it will cut into time spent with family, at
work, or at social gatherings. People who are ambivalent about exercise
might easily find excuses as to why it just won't fit into their
lifestyle. Informing clients about all the benefits of exercise and the
negative effects of sedentary living on the overall quality of life may
be a good place to start. However, ambivalent people may be aware of the
benefits but also struggle with the drastic way in which regular
exercise may affect other aspects of their life. When people see both
sides of an argument, they can often weigh the pros and cons along with
assessing the benefits versus the effort it will take or what must be
sacrificed to participate. For ambivalent clients, it will be necessary
to probe further to find out the other significant barriers and also
what might motivate them to take action.]{.mark}

[TRY THIS]{.mark}

[Take some time to identify barriers that prevent participation in
exercise and strategize ways to personally overcome these barriers. This
will allow you to relate to the struggles that clients face while
providing solutions. Clients will appreciate that they are not the only
ones facing barriers and will benefit from the personal
connection.]{.mark}

**Social influences on exercise**

[There are a number of possible social influences on overall exercise
behaviour, which vary among individuals. Determining which social
influences are meaningful to a client will help explain the role that
these influences might play in terms of exercise behaviour. In general,
influence means having an effect over the behaviour of a person or
group. Social influences are constantly present in exercise behaviour,
and these influences can lead individuals both toward and away from
structured exercise. It is important to recognize that not all social
influences are positive, and in such cases, they become a barrier to
overcome. Social support has two main components: who or what is
providing the support and what type of support is being provided.
Support from family and friends may seem like the most likely source,
but it can come from anyone, including coworkers, healthcare providers,
fitness professionals, or fellow exercisers.]{.mark}

[Social influences have also grown well beyond personal interactions,
with people using social media for inspiration, information, and
support. Social media can provide several outlets for people who may not
have a supportive face-to-face network. For example, some people
maintain blogs, websites, or a social media platform where they track
their fitness journey; there are online support groups for any number of
behavioural changes. Fitness professionals should ask clients which
online sites they use to gain a better understanding of possible social
influences. Fitness professionals should help evaluate the information,
such as whether or not a source has reliable information and if healthy
habits are being encouraged, so that clients are not receiving mixed
messages. Additionally, information on social media platforms should be
evaluated regarding its realistic or unrealistic nature. For example,
images that depict extreme physiques, such as bodybuilders or fitness
models, may negatively impact the way someone feels about their own
body.]{.mark}

[CRITICAL]{.mark}

[Fitness professionals can help clients determine if a website is
providing reliable information or not. First, look at who is responsible
for the information. There should be an easily identified source with
contact information such as colleges and universities, government
agencies, and well-known organizations (e.g., the World Health
Organization). Also, if a product or service is being advertised, such
as a product for weight loss, caution should always be used. Helping
clients sort through fact versus fiction will ensure their safety and
ultimately their success.]{.mark}

[When first meeting with clients, one priority should be to determine
the types of social influence in their lives and whether or not these
influences are supportive of the exercise behaviour. For example, do
they have an exercise partner, or do they have a strong emotional
support system? Most often, past success or failure with exercise can be
connected to the amount of social support for the behaviour. Helping
clients differentiate between someone's support for their desire to
exercise versus someone who is indifferent or unsupportive will help
determine the influence level regarding the types of support received by
certain individuals.]{.mark}

[A client may also have conflicting influences, which cause them to be
torn between time to exercise and other obligations. Regardless of the
type of social influence that touches a person, changing behavior will
likely be due to (and with the assistance of) some type of influence or
support. When clients do not have adequate social support available,
fitness professionals can play a key role in making the fitness facility
an inviting place where clients feel they are supported. This can be
done by introducing clients to the staff and members, finding group
exercise classes that appeal to the client, or providing small group
training sessions for people with common interests or goals. The
important thing is to provide additional opportunities for people to
connect and build a healthy community, especially for those who do not
have strong support systems.]{.mark}

**Types of support**

[Social support can come from a variety of sources, including family,
friends, and fitness professionals, and the several types of support can
include instrumental, emotional, informational, and companionship
support. Due to the individual nature of social support and the way it
relates to exercise behaviour, it is a topic that is still not fully
understood by practitioners. The source and type of support considered
as useful and meaningful will differ among individuals; it can change
based on phase of life, proximity to family and friends, and the overall
environment.]{.mark}

+------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| **[Type of             | **[Example]{.mark}**                             |
| Support]{.mark}**      |                                                  |
+:=======================+:=================================================+
| [Instrumental]{.mark}  | [Providing transportation to a fitness           |
|                        | facility]{.mark}                                 |
|                        |                                                  |
|                        | [Paying for someone's gym membership]{.mark}     |
|                        |                                                  |
|                        | [Watching children to allow a parent to          |
|                        | exercise]{.mark}                                 |
+------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| [Emotional]{.mark}     | [Encouraging someone to exercise]{.mark}         |
|                        |                                                  |
|                        | [Providing positive feedback]{.mark}             |
|                        |                                                  |
|                        | [Listening to someone when they are frustrated   |
|                        | with exercise]{.mark}                            |
|                        |                                                  |
|                        | [Being empathetic by communicating an            |
|                        | understanding of how someone feels]{.mark}       |
+------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| [Informational]{.mark} | [Giving sound advice about how to achieve        |
|                        | optimal health and fitness]{.mark}               |
|                        |                                                  |
|                        | [Providing education about the current           |
|                        | recommendations for physical activity]{.mark}    |
|                        |                                                  |
|                        | [Educating people about the risk of poor health  |
|                        | accompanying a sedentary lifestyle]{.mark}       |
+------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| [Companionship]{.mark} | [Exercising with someone]{.mark}                 |
|                        |                                                  |
|                        | [Accompanying someone during an exercise         |
|                        | session]{.mark}                                  |
|                        |                                                  |
|                        | [Finding physically active options for social    |
|                        | gatherings]{.mark}                               |
+------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+

[While the role of the fitness professional as a source of social
support is not well documented, based on client expectations, some forms
of social support (such as informational and companionship) should be
assumed for the trainer--client relationship. The phase of life has a
strong influence over the origin of social support. For example,
children and adolescents are most influenced by parents and other family
members, while the emphasis shifts to friends for young adults, and
older adults rely on family members for support to exercise.]{.mark}

[Instrumental support]{.underline}

[Instrumental support describes the actual actions of a person that help
another person engage in a behaviour. These actions directly facilitate
the behaviour, such as removing a barrier. For some individuals, this
type of support is crucial for exercise adherence because if help is not
provided, a physical barrier may not be overcome. This includes
transportation to the gym or health club, childcare responsibilities,
and financial considerations.]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[When recalling the purpose of social support, keep in mind that there
are always two components to consider: who and what. Who is providing
the support? This can be a significant other, family member, friend,
coworker, healthcare provider, or fitness professional. What type of
support is given? This can be instrumental, emotional, informational, or
companionship.]{.mark}

[Driving someone to a fitness facility, babysitting, or paying for
someone's gym membership are all ways of providing instrumental support.
Additionally, with lack of time often cited as a top barrier, anything
that helps create more available time would also be instrumental.
Examples of this would be doing things for someone such as grocery
shopping, transporting children to events, or cooking. It can also be
gestures like taking someone shopping to find proper workout attire or
packing a gym bag for a significant other. Regardless of the type of
instrumental support, it will likely have a positive impact for someone
who is trying to exercise regularly.]{.mark}

[Emotional support]{.underline}

[Overall, emotional support is considered very important for people to
start and continue with an exercise program. It refers to the
encouragement and positive reinforcement that is provided and includes
being caring and empathetic and showing concern. Some examples are
telling individuals that they are doing great with exercising, asking
how their workouts are going, or allowing them to vent when they are
frustrated with their progress.]{.mark}

[Empathy, an important component of emotional support, happens when
someone identifies with the way another person feels. A simple way to
describe being empathetic is the ability to put yourself in someone
else's shoes. Empathy helps people relate and connect and ultimately
helps them feel that they are understood. Exercise can be a very
rewarding experience that people thoroughly enjoy, but it can also be
frustrating when results are not evident, or when exercise is
uncomfortable; emotional support can be the one thing that keeps someone
going.]{.mark}

[Routinely communicating with clients, asking how they are doing and how
they feel their program is going, is a way to foster relationships.
Fitness professionals should also demonstrate empathy by indicating
their understanding of how a client feels. Emotional support may be
important to some clients daily while others only need it occasionally.
Taking the time to get to know clients and learning about their
preferences will ensure that individual needs are met.]{.mark}

STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

[Empathy and sympathy are two different concepts. Sympathy typically
involves pity and feeling sorry for someone else. Conversely, empathy is
a deep understanding and recognition of how someone feels. Empathy does
not involve judgment.]{.mark}

[Informational support]{.underline}

[Informational support is when someone receives accurate information
about a behaviour or topic. This is the most common type of support
provided by a fitness professional. Finding information about exercise
and fitness has become easier with countless online platforms, but the
accuracy of information is sometimes questionable based on the source. A
client might first receive informational support regarding exercise from
a healthcare provider, family member, friend, coworker, or social media
influencer. However, seeking out additional and more specific
informational support may be one of the top reasons for a person to hire
a Certified Personal Trainer.]{.mark}

[Clients rely heavily on fitness professionals to have the most accurate
and up-to-date information as well as the ability to answer questions.
Informational support includes providing general fitness advice and
programming, providing specific feedback on progress with program
adjustments, providing new and interesting information about the
benefits of exercise versus the drawbacks of inactivity, and being able
to dispel and correct myths and inaccurate information. Therefore, it is
imperative for fitness professionals to have a strong foundation
regarding general exercise science, as well as the habit of continually
seeking out correct information to pass along to clients.]{.mark}

[Companionship support]{.underline}

[Companionship support describes the way that someone engages in a
behaviour with another individual. This type of support is often
observed in an exercise setting where people exercise with a friend or
partner. Companionship support can have several positive influences on
exercise behaviour. As a form of accountability, it can encourage
consistency, create a friendly competition, foster social relationships,
and serve as a distraction to the discomforts caused by
exercise.]{.mark}

[Exercising with a partner also requires people to plan because
schedules must be coordinated and time needs to be blocked off. This can
help eliminate excuses that could have encouraged a person to skip a
workout. Companionship support is a key component of face-to-face
personal training, with the fitness professional present for the entire
exercise session.]{.mark}

[When a client hires a Certified Personal Trainer, there is an
expectation that companionship support is built into the experience.
Fitness professionals need to stay focused on the client, push the
client to work at an appropriate intensity, and keep the client on task.
Finally, companionship support might simply make exercise more fun to
do, regardless the partner.]{.mark}

TRAINING TIP

[When training clients, it is very important to avoid distractions and
keep the focus on the person who is paying for your service. During a
session, avoid getting into in-depth conversations with other health
club members or coworkers, do not look at your phone during a session,
and do not let small distractions shift your attention away from your
client. By keeping your focus on your client, you will provide
significant companionship support and also provide excellent customer
service.]{.mark}

**Group influences on exercise**

[Group influences play a key role in many decision-making processes. As
previously described, support can be given to a person in countless
ways, but equally important is the person who provides that support. For
example, young adults may be more influenced by their peers, while those
in a mid-life stage might prefer support from a spouse or family member.
Also, the source of information can be important; for instance, advice
on overall health and well-being might be well received from a
healthcare provider, but that same advice could be resisted when coming
from a family member. Groups that may have a regular influence on
physical activity are significant others, family members, peers, and
exercise leaders. Regardless of the origin and the form of the support,
a client needs to be open to taking that support for it to become
effective.]{.mark}

[Family]{.underline}

[Family is one of the most important influences for most behaviours in
life, especially for children and adolescents, but family influences are
likely to remain strong throughout life. In research, the term *family*
often refers to any family member, whether or not that person lives in
the household, and individuals who live in a household but are not
related. As stated previously, depending on the individual's phase of
life, the family influence can be quite different; younger people tend
to be more influenced by parents, while mid-life and older adults are
more influenced by a significant other. Social support for physical
activity from family is particularly important for older adults as
demonstrated by studies where family members were available to walk with
and encourage exercise.]{.mark}

[Family support differs from other sources of support because family
members are typically more permanent. If someone does not care for an
exercise leader or group, they can simply discontinue, but the same is
not true regarding family, whose behavioural influences could be
positive or negative. Living with family members who are inactive and do
not value exercise can be a source of constant barriers. Fitness
professionals should get a sense of whether or not family members are
supportive of exercise and if they can provide any support. It should be
acknowledged when family members are not supportive so that other
sources of support can be identified.]{.mark}

[[Parental]{.underline}]{.mark}

[The influence of parents on exercise behaviour is particularly
important for children and adolescents. If parents have a positive
relationship with exercise, then their children will be more likely to
have a positive outlook on regular exercise, which can carry on into
adulthood. Parents typically provide emotional and instrumental support,
with the main type of instrumental support coming from providing
transportation and paying for activities. For adolescents, this type of
support, even more than emotional support from family and peers, can
explain long-term exercise adherence.]{.mark}

[Research has also shown that parental support for physical activity is
important for adolescents, including the transition to adulthood,
indicating that parental influence goes beyond children and adolescents.
Parental influence over physical activity is apparent at a very young
age; evidence shows that there is a positive relationship between the
physical activity of mothers and their preschool children, meaning if
mothers were active, then so were their children. Parents can also
provide informational support to children by talking about the
importance of regular exercise and all the benefits it brings. It is
also beneficial for children to try a variety of physical activities
(e.g., sports and recreational activities) so that they can naturally
find which activities they do well or simply enjoy the most. Having an
early and consistent exposure to exercise and physical activities will
help create habits that are long-lasting.]{.mark}

[Exercise leaders]{.underline}

[Group exercise comes in many forms, including formatted classes taught
to music and small group personal training, such as boot camps or
sport-specific training. It can be found in large fitness facilities and
small boutique studios, and some businesses are structured around only
offering group exercise experiences. While not everyone will consider a
group setting appealing, it does remain a popular way for many people to
regularly engage in exercise. The exercise leader plays a crucial role
with the overall tone and flow of the experience. Generally speaking,
this is the person who should greet all members, make everyone feel
welcome, ensure that participants have the right equipment and attire to
safely engage, and use a variety of techniques to motivate and energize
a group.]{.mark}

[The exercise leader can also go a step further and learn participant's
names, introduce new members to the existing group, and try to connect
with members before and after class to provide encouragement and get
feedback. The idea of providing leadership in an exercise setting may
not be a common expectation when professionals enter the fitness
industry, but leadership plays a key role in determining whether a
participant adheres to exercise or drops out. It is often noted that
there is not a single best approach to leadership, but there are
recognized components for effective leadership: the leader's qualities,
leadership styles, situational factors, and follower's
qualities.]{.mark}

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Leadership         **[Examples]{.mark}**
  Component]{.mark}**   
  --------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
  [Leader's             [The leader should offer a great example in how to
  qualities]{.mark}     lead a healthy and balanced life, which includes
                        being optimistic, empathetic, and
                        knowledgeable.]{.mark}

  [Leadership           [The different styles of leadership include a
  styles]{.mark}        participant-centred approach that encourages
                        feedback and input or an autocratic approach where
                        participants are told what to do in a task-oriented
                        environment. Leaders should be able to adjust their
                        style based on the situation.]{.mark}

  [Situational          [These factors include group size, whether it is a
  factors]{.mark}       large or small group, and potential adjustments for
                        style; for example, larger groups may need a more
                        autocratic style.]{.mark}

  [Follower's           [Leaders should consider the qualities of the
  qualities]{.mark}     followers, including age, gender, and exercise
                        experience.]{.mark}
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

[An exercise leader has a unique opportunity to make a positive impact
on large or small groups of people and to help foster a cohesive group
environment. Aside from bringing a group together, the exercise leader
should also be able to reach individual participants with simple
gestures like making eye contact, smiling, and giving positive verbal
feedback. With the goal of making everyone feel included, it is also
necessary to demonstrate exercise modifications so that people with
varying skills can all be challenged within a single session. The
exercise leader is an important person for clients to emulate because
that person demonstrates the exercises, helps set goals, and shows that
exercise can be done consistently. Exercise leaders should be aware that
because members pay close attention to what they are doing and how they
approach exercise, it is important to be a positive role model and send
appropriate verbal and nonverbal messages.]{.mark}

TRY THIS

[Certified Personal Trainers may be expected to provide recommendations
for clients regarding which group exercise classes are the best to
attend. Consequently, Certified Personal Trainers should be
knowledgeable about different class formats and the instructors who
teach them. All fitness professionals should consider taking a variety
of classes to learn more about various exercise formats and instruction
styles. This will help match clients to classes and instructors that
best suit their needs and personalities.]{.mark}

[The exercise group]{.underline}

[The idea of an exercise group has become common in the fitness industry
along with the growing popularity of exercise sessions coached by
certified professionals. The exercise group consists of the participants
who are present for a given class or session. With many people drawn to
certain types of exercise and who follow consistent schedules, it is
common to see the same faces for group exercise sessions. Oftentimes, a
good exercise leader will develop a following, and an exercise group
will form. One aspect of an exercise group is feeling distinct from
others; fitness professionals can encourage this simply by having
participants wear the same colour shirt or having the group come
together at the end of a session for a group cheer or any other ritual
that is specific to that group.]{.mark}

[While the overall influence held by a group over exercise behaviour is
still not fully understood, there is a general consensus that being a
part of a group has a positive effect. People simply exercising together
may not necessarily identify as a group, because groups have distinct
characteristics and the members often have formal or informal roles. A
formal role would be held by the exercise leader or coach from whom
instruction and organization are expected.]{.mark}

[Informal roles may include those who tend to inspire the group, provide
mentorship to new members, or plan social gatherings. It has been noted
that for intact exercise groups that strongly identify as a distinct
group, those members also perceive a social connection with each other
and group cohesion. However, the process by which individuals in an
exercise environment actually become a group is not well understood.
People are drawn to group exercise for many different reasons and often
for more than one reason.]{.mark}

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **[Reason]{.mark}**       **[Benefit]{.mark}**
  ------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  [Accountability]{.mark}   [Being part of an exercise group brings
                            accountability for regular attendance, both from
                            members of the group and the exercise leader.]{.mark}

  [Comparison]{.mark}       [Participants have people they can compare themselves
                            against; the ability to see what others can do and
                            achieve can serve as further motivation.]{.mark}

  [Competition]{.mark}      [Group environments can bring about friendly
                            competition among participants or within individuals
                            to reach their personal best.]{.mark}

  [Comradery]{.mark}        [Individuals can form connections with people who are
                            attempting to achieve similar results, while
                            experiencing feelings of friendship, closeness, and
                            loyalty.]{.mark}

  [Consistency]{.mark}      [Having a schedule that allows participants to
                            anticipate the experience will help form
                            habits.]{.mark}

  [Energy]{.mark}           [Most group exercise classes are designed to be high
                            energy, making it an attractive environment to which
                            people are drawn.]{.mark}

  [Intensity]{.mark}        [Participants are encouraged to try the best they
                            can, and they may work harder in the presence of the
                            group.]{.mark}

  [Mindless]{.mark}         [Since the exercise session is planned, participants
                            just need to show up and follow instructions without
                            thinking about designing their own workouts.]{.mark}

  [Motivation]{.mark}       [Exercising with a group can by itself be a form of
                            motivation to regularly participate.]{.mark}

  [Sociability]{.mark}      [When a group or situation is warm and inviting, it
                            brings people together; when people feel welcome,
                            they are likely to return.]{.mark}
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------

TRAINING TIP

[Joining an intact exercise group may be intimidating for some clients.
Fitness professionals can help identify groups that share similar
characteristics or goals and encourage clients to participate. If
clients are unsure of their ability to fit into a group, one way to help
them adjust is to attend an exercise session with them, which may help
reduce insecurities about trying something new.]{.mark}

[The community]{.underline}

[The community plays a unique role in exercise behaviour based on the
opportunities available for people to be physically active. There is
evidence that the physical surroundings, also known as the built
environment, has a strong influence over activity levels in a
community.]{.mark}

[The number of sidewalks and walking and biking paths available can
impact people's activity levels. It is important to note that
communities vary quite a bit in terms of resources, safety,
transportation, and social norms. Active communities will likely have
more green space, walking trails, playgrounds, sidewalks, and biking
trails, as well as an emphasis on safe public transportation and
neighbourhoods. Being aware of the opportunities or challenges of
participating in exercise outside of a fitness facility will help
clients make decisions about how to best maximize an active
lifestyle.]{.mark}

## Psychological benefits of exercise

[The positive benefits of exercise go far beyond a physical
transformation. The psychological benefits of exercise are well
established and can be experienced over both the short and long term.
Some of the known psychological benefits to exercise include improved
mood, increased self-esteem, increased positive body image, better
sleep, and decreased levels of depression and anxiety. Conversely,
sedentary behaviour has been linked to an increase in depression. This
relationship can be partially explained by sedentary people experiencing
limitations with their movement, problems with sleep and low energy,
some levels of pain and discomfort with movement, and higher levels of
anxiety.]{.mark}

[What may not be as clear is whether sedentary behaviour leads to
increased depression, or whether depression leads a person toward
sedentary behaviour, which leads to poor health status. There is also
growing evidence that physical activity of moderate intensity may be the
most effective approach. In one study, aerobic exercise of moderate
intensity improved self-perceptions of strength and muscular development
and improved feelings of autonomy and well-being. Many of the
psychological benefits from exercise are experienced together; for
example, depression may improve along with better sleep and improved
social interactions. In general, there is an association between being
physically active and having a greater sense of well-being. For example,
inactive people rated their health and satisfaction with life lower than
those who exercised. Regardless of the reason why someone decides to
exercise, psychological benefits will inevitably occur and may help
reinforce the behaviour.]{.mark}

**Promotes positive mood**

[The term *mood* refers to how someone feels; it is considered a more
long-term state of mind, unlike emotion, which is a short-term reaction
to a situation. People will often define their mood as "good" or "bad"
based on the way they generally feel. Many factors affecting mood can
include being fatigued, experiencing success or failure, and hearing
good or bad news. Many people express mood with their nonverbal
communication: body language, tone of voice, and eye contact. Mood can
also help foster relationships and social interactions, because people
will often be drawn toward others who regularly demonstrate a good mood
or positive energy. Researchers are often interested in the way that a
single bout of exercise affects mood in the short-term and how long-term
participation influences overall mood. Exercise has demonstrated a
generally favourable effect on various mood profiles with durations
anywhere from 10 to 60 minutes, making even short bouts of exercise
effective in improving mood.]{.mark}

**Improves self-esteem and body image**

[Self-esteem and body image are psychological variables associated with
a number of health concerns, including depression, eating disorders, and
exercise addiction. The serious implications of these conditions make
these variables important to monitor, especially in populations that may
be at a higher risk of developing habits that could lead to poor mental
and physical health. Self-esteem and body image have long been connected
to each other due to the reciprocal nature of the two, meaning that
people with low self-esteem may also have body image issues and having
body image issues can lead people to having low self-esteem]{.mark}.

[Self-esteem refers to the way someone evaluates their own self-worth;
it has different domains such as physical, emotional, and social.
Physical self-esteem has subdomains that include people's
self-perception of their own fitness levels, the attractiveness level of
their physiques, their physical strength, and their competence level at
sports. Body image, generally defined as the way people view their
physical selves, can be based on the way people visualize their bodies
or how they feel in their own skins. Body image may not match reality;
people may view their bodies in a negative way and evaluate themselves
inaccurately. These variables and the way they relate to fitness will
vary among populations because body ideals are different for men and
women and between cultures.]{.mark}

[For example, muscular strength has historically been important for men
and their self-esteem, but not as much for women. While body image has
been studied extensively, there is still some confusion within the
general population, where body image is viewed only as a "women's
problem" of negativity. In light of this, another study found that both
aerobic and resistance training improved overall body image in women
with preexisting body image concerns, which demonstrates that
appropriate exercise can improve these variables. But regardless of
biological sex, weight loss and weight management are related to both
self-esteem and body image. For example, in a long-term study, both
self-esteem and body image were positively influenced when previously
obese adolescents lost weight in their young adult years.]{.mark}

HELPFUL HINT

[Body image and self-esteem are related. In many cases, they have a
mutual relationship, meaning that as body image improves, self-esteem
will also likely improve. This is also true in the other direction; for
example, if self-esteem decreases, body image will likely become more
negative and vice versa.]{.mark}

**Improves sleep**

[Sleep is an important part of everyone's day in terms of how a person
will function. As our most restorative tool, it is necessary for nearly
every physical, physiological, and psychological function. Sleep, or
lack thereof, plays a significant role in physical and mental health,
overall quality of life, and even one's safety. Sleep has many
restorative functions and is vital for proper growth, development,
healing, and learning. Sleep-deficient individuals are at a greater risk
of heart disease, stroke, high blood pressure, and obesity. When someone
is sleep-deprived, they are also at risk for making poor decisions and
not thinking properly, which can cause problems with work or
relationships.]{.mark}

[Exercise has been shown to improve sleep. Moderate amounts of exercise,
in terms of frequency, duration, and intensity, are associated with
significantly lower disturbances in sleep compared to sedentary
behaviour. This suggests that exercise needs to reach a certain
threshold to be beneficial, but excessive physical activity may not
improve sleep quality. People diagnosed with chronic sleep disturbances
may benefit from all types of regular exercise. In fact, increasing
physical activity to at least 150 minutes per week at a moderate
intensity can decrease symptoms of insomnia.]{.mark}

[Resistance training has also been shown to improve sleep for people
with chronic insomnia. Exercise is also believed to be beneficial for
people with more serious sleep disturbances. In patients being treated
with exercise for sleep apnoea, symptoms were shown to improve with
increased physical activity. Overall, the relationship between regular
exercise and improving sleep is positive.]{.mark}

**Reduces depression and anxiety**

[According to the World Health Organization, depression is a common
mental health issue that afflicts approximately 300 million people
worldwide. Anxiety can be experienced with depression but can also occur
by itself. Research on the effects of exercise on depression and anxiety
has been conducted for decades and continues to be an area of interest
among health professionals, including physicians, psychologists, and
exercise scientists.]{.mark}

[Much of the interest in this area surrounds exercise as a treatment
option for depression. One of the challenges is that people with
depression tend to participate in low levels of physical activity, and
they are less likely than their nondepressed counterparts to meet
current physical activity guidelines. The evidence also shows that
exercise may be effective in offering a preventive effect against the
development of depression across all ages regardless of geographic
area.]{.mark}

[The intensity of exercise may be important when addressing depression.
One study showed that both moderate-intensity exercise and
high-intensity exercise decreased depression; however, the
high-intensity exercise also increased perceived stress, suggesting that
moderate-intensity exercise may be best. For some individuals, even a
simple approach to physical activity can lead to psychological
improvements. For example, a monitored walking program performed three
times per week resulted in reduced anxiety in a group of previously
inactive overweight and obese individuals. While depression and anxiety
are common, a person's mental health should always be taken seriously.
The inclusion of exercise as a way to reduce or prevent symptoms has
promise, but a treatment plan must always originate from a qualified
healthcare provider.]{.mark}

[CRITICAL]{.mark}

[While exercise is known to reduce feelings of depression and anxiety, a
fitness professional should never attempt to diagnose any mental illness
or prescribe exercise to clients as a form of treatment. Only a licensed
medical provider can diagnose illnesses and prescribe treatments.
Therefore, if any mental illness is suspected, clients should be
referred to their primary care physician for further evaluation.]{.mark}

## Introduction to behavioural coaching

[Due to widespread failure to engage in, maintain, or achieve adequate
amounts of physical activity, effective coaching techniques are needed
to promote physical activity and structured exercise. How can successful
Certified Personal Trainers work with clients to educate them on the
advantages of exercise behaviour and long-term adherence? To map out a
successful intervention for the client, some of the essential elements
include identifying the determinants of exercise behaviour,
understanding theory and techniques to drive behaviour change,
identifying client needs in the initial session, and determining the
most effective style of delivery (which includes effective communication
skills). This chapter explores some of the essential elements needed to
help identify client needs, motivate them, and help them with
self-regulatory issues to assist in exercise adoption and
adherence.]{.mark}

**Client expectations of a Certified Personal Trainer**

[Certified Personal Trainers can have a significant influence on their
clients' health. Therefore, the fitness professional has a
responsibility to design programs, give effective advice, and create
environments that help their clients adhere to a fitness
routine.]{.mark}

[Making a good first impression is crucial for a client to see the
fitness professional as both an ally and an authority in the gym.
Certified Personal Trainers should have a positive attitude and strong
communication and listening skills. They should help clients feel
confident and competent while preserving their autonomy to do exercises
that they enjoy, while avoiding ones they do not. A good first
impression typically includes:]{.mark}

1.  [Making eye contact (if culturally accepted)]{.mark}

2.  [Introducing oneself by name and asking the client's name]{.mark}

3.  [Smiling]{.mark}

4.  [Shaking hands with the client (if culturally accepted)]{.mark}

5.  [Remembering the client's name and using it]{.mark}

6.  [Using positive body language]{.mark}

[If the client has completed an online application where they supplied
personal interests, such as medical history or hobbies, fitness
professionals should ask about them. Clients appreciate when fitness
professionals show they have invested time prior to the session to get
to know them. Aside from having a positive attitude and effective
communication skills, fitness professionals should work hard to exhibit
the following qualities to create an inclusive environment that keeps
clients coming back:]{.mark}

1.  [Look professional: neat, clean, and appropriately dressed.]{.mark}

2.  [Take time to build a trusting relationship with new
    clients.]{.mark}

3.  [Ensure that the client feels heard and understood.]{.mark}

4.  [Ensure the client's safety when exercising.]{.mark}

5.  [Build community by making a client's exercise routine a
    collaborative effort.]{.mark}

**Client expectations of the environment**

[The training environment includes the actual facility as well as the
people inside the facility. The training environment can either hinder
or foster intrinsic motivation. Staff members who are friendly, caring,
and supportive of clients' goals can have a positive impact on whether a
client continues to return. Therefore, the environment that Certified
Personal Trainers work in reflects who they are and will ultimately
determine the type of clients they attract. For this reason, the most
successful health clubs work hard to create a third space environment
for their members.]{.mark}

[A third space is considered a special, communal space that is separate
from home or work. It is a place where individuals can build
relationships with others while still expressing their own sense of
identity. Third spaces should elicit a playful mood, helping clients to
feel like they are in a home away from home. Certified Personal Trainers
should strive to do their part in making the gym or fitness studio feel
like a third space for clients. Before a client joins a gym, they will
likely consider the following:]{.mark}

- [Are there a variety of training options to choose from?]{.mark}

- [Is the training environment supportive?]{.mark}

- [Does it look like they will fit in with the club's culture?]{.mark}

- [What is the cost of a membership and personal training?]{.mark}

- [How convenient is the location?]{.mark}

- [Are the facilities clean and neat?]{.mark}

**Introduction to behaviour change techniques**

[To improve coaching interventions that change behaviour, Certified
Personal Trainers need to identify appropriate behaviour change
techniques (BCTs). BCTs are the active elements for intervention
strategies that affect the determinants of. For example, self-efficacy
is a well-established determinant of exercise behaviour; therefore, to
promote changes that increase exercise adherence, a behaviour change
technique that influences self-efficacy should be used.]{.mark}

+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| **[Desired              | **[Behaviour Change     | **[Definition]{.mark}** |
| Outcome]{.mark}**       | Technique]{.mark}**     |                         |
+:========================+:========================+:========================+
| [Improved               | [Set specific           | [Break down exercises   |
| self-efficacy]{.mark}   | tasks]{.mark}           | or goals into           |
|                         |                         | easier-to-achieve       |
|                         |                         | tasks. Build the        |
|                         |                         | stepping stones for     |
|                         |                         | progressively more      |
|                         |                         | challenging exercises   |
|                         |                         | or behaviours.]{.mark}  |
|                         +-------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [Provide                | [Provide instructions   |
|                         | instructions]{.mark}    | on how to perform the   |
|                         |                         | behaviour. This can be  |
|                         |                         | in person, in writing,  |
|                         |                         | or in video.]{.mark}    |
|                         +-------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [Practice for           | [Encourage frequent     |
|                         | mastery]{.mark}         | practice of challenging |
|                         |                         | tasks with adequate     |
|                         |                         | feedback to enhance     |
|                         |                         | learning.]{.mark}       |
|                         +-------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [Communicate            | [Use positive           |
|                         | positively]{.mark}      | encouragement to help   |
|                         |                         | clients believe they    |
|                         |                         | have the ability to     |
|                         |                         | change for the          |
|                         |                         | better.]{.mark}         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| [Positive outcome       | [Supply                 | [Present foundational   |
| expectations and        | information]{.mark}     | science on the health   |
| attitudes]{.mark}       |                         | benefits of exercise    |
|                         |                         | and the consequences of |
|                         |                         | sedentary               |
|                         |                         | behaviour.]{.mark}      |
|                         +-------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [Prompt anticipated     | [Help clients imagine   |
|                         | regret]{.mark}          | how their life would be |
|                         |                         | different by changing a |
|                         |                         | behaviour compared with |
|                         |                         | the consequences of not |
|                         |                         | changing it.]{.mark}    |
|                         +-------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [Apply motivational     | [Use guiding questions  |
|                         | interviewing]{.mark}    | that prompt clients to  |
|                         |                         | engage in critical      |
|                         |                         | thinking that helps     |
|                         |                         | resolve ambivalence     |
|                         |                         | about change.]{.mark}   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| [Manage social          | [Encourage social       | [Ask clients how they   |
| influence]{.mark}       | support]{.mark}         | plan to gain social     |
|                         |                         | support from friends    |
|                         |                         | and family.]{.mark}     |
|                         +-------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [Foster                 | [Help clients build     |
|                         | discipline]{.mark}      | skills for resisting    |
|                         |                         | social                  |
|                         |                         | pressure.]{.mark}       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| [Promote                | [Make a plan]{.mark}    | [Provide detailed       |
| self-regulation]{.mark} |                         | planning on when and    |
|                         |                         | where clients will      |
|                         |                         | engage in               |
|                         |                         | exercise.]{.mark}       |
|                         +-------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [Identify coping        | [List potential         |
|                         | responses]{.mark}       | barriers and make plans |
|                         |                         | to overcome each        |
|                         |                         | one.]{.mark}            |
|                         +-------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [Set SMART              | [Set both short-term    |
|                         | goals]{.mark}           | and long-term goals     |
|                         |                         | that are specific,      |
|                         |                         | measurable, attainable, |
|                         |                         | realistic, and          |
|                         |                         | timely.]{.mark}         |
|                         +-------------------------+-------------------------+
|                         | [Promote                | [Encourage clients to   |
|                         | self-monitoring]{.mark} | keep records of the     |
|                         |                         | specific behaviour they |
|                         |                         | want to change to help  |
|                         |                         | enhance adherence to    |
|                         |                         | the program.]{.mark}    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+

HELPFUL HINT

[Behaviour change techniques, by nature, are generic. Self-efficacy, for
example, may be enhanced with several different behaviour change
techniques, which can be delivered through several different channels.
Fitness professionals cannot always deliver behaviour change techniques
in person. The use of technology, such as text message reminders, email
lists, and social media interactions, can help considerably with
adherence to a routine while a client is outside of the gym.]{.mark}

## Determinants of participation in exercise

[Successfully changing fitness behaviours begins with a clear
understanding of the contributing factors that influence whether people
participate. Coaching works by changing one or more of these factors,
which are called determinants of behaviour. Essentially, determinants of
behaviour represent the generic modifiable variables that cause a
behaviour. Participating in exercise has several determinants, including
motivation, self-efficacy, self-regulation, exercise history, body
weight, stress, social support, access, time constraints, and
characteristics of the exercise behaviour. Once fitness professionals
understand what contributes to participation in exercise, they need to
understand the foundational theories to match BCTs to their client's
needs.]{.mark}

**Determinants of participation in physical activity and exercise**

[Self-efficacy (i.e., self-confidence) is one of the strongest
determinants of physical activity in adults. An individual's stage of
change and intention have also been identified as determinants of
behaviour. Job strain and working hours were shown to have an inverse
relationship with leisure-time physical activity. People are also more
likely to engage in regular exercise when they have support from people
in their home and work environments. Self-determination theory
variables, including autonomous motivation and perceived competence,
have also been found to be related to exercise behaviour.]{.mark}

[Furthermore, planning---a self-regulatory strategy---has positive
influences on physical activity. Regular exercisers report higher levels
of self-monitoring as well. Additionally, one of the most recent reviews
identified 40 psychological factors and 13 social factors as being
related to physical activity. Cognitive and emotional factors,
attitudes, intention, outcome expectations, stress, perceived
behavioural control, and self-efficacy have all been identified as
associated with physical activity as well.]{.mark}

**Determinants of participation in resistance training**

[Resistance training is a unique form of exercise that is likely more
challenging to start than aerobic exercise or recreational physical
activity. It requires numerous participatory resources, including
knowledge of how to design programs and the skills to execute complex
movements.]{.mark}

[Therefore, while many determinants are shared with exercise and
physical activity, it is useful to address resistance training on its
own.]{.mark}

[There is evidence to support the relationships between resistance
training participation and affective judgment, self-efficacy and
perceived behavioural control, self-regulatory behaviours, and
intention. In other words, people tend to engage in resistance training
when they think it feels good, believe they can do the exercises
correctly and overcome barriers, can self-monitor and makes plans, and
have high levels of motivation. Intention is a direct predictor of
behaviour, but planning has also been shown to help translate intentions
and self-efficacy to behaviour. Subjective norms also have a small,
positive relationship with resistance training.]{.mark}

## The Stages of Change Model

[The Stages of Change model (also known as the Transtheoretical Model of
Behaviour Change) views change as a process that involves progression
through a series of stages. These stages are precontemplation,
contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance. The model was
originally conceived as a means to help people quit smoking, but it can
be applied to virtually any situation where a person is trying to break
bad habits and form new positive ones. In regard to personal fitness,
the stages of change reference a person's readiness to begin and adhere
to an exercise program:]{.mark}

1.  [Precontemplation stage: the individual does not exercise and is not
    planning to start exercising within the next 6 months]{.mark}

2.  [Contemplation stage: the individual does not currently exercise but
    is planning to start within 6 months]{.mark}

3.  [Preparation stage: the individual is planning to begin exercising
    soon and has taken steps toward it and may even be sporadically
    exercising]{.mark}

4.  [Action stage: the individual has been exercising for less than 6
    months]{.mark}

5.  [Maintenance stage: the individual has been exercising consistently
    for 6 months or more (Glanz et al., 2008; Spencer et al.,
    2006)]{.mark}

GETTING TECHNICAL

[A sixth stage of the original Transtheoretical Model, called
termination, also exists but has little to no application to exercise
adherence. For smoking cessation, the termination phase represents the
point at which an individual no longer has any desire to smoke ever
again with no risk of relapse. When it comes to exercise, busy
lifestyles make it virtually impossible to stick to a dedicated exercise
plan forever. For that reason, even the most dedicated athletes will
shift between preparation, action, and maintenance.]{.mark}

[The Stages of Change model also includes processes of change,
self-efficacy, and decisional balance. People move through the stages of
change by using behavioural and cognitive processes of change
strategies. For example, fitness-promoting behaviours are influenced by
self-monitoring strategies, along with enhanced confidence and perceived
benefits of resistance training. Decisional balance refers to the
process of weighing the positive and negative outcomes of engaging in or
increasing exercise behaviour. As benefits increase and negatives
decrease, people move toward the maintenance end of the stages of change
continuum.]{.mark}

[Processes of change provide strategies on how to apply BCTs. In early
stages, clients may apply cognitive processes to progress through
stages. In later stages, they rely more on behavioural processes for
progressing toward maintenance. For example, an individual in the
contemplation phase may benefit more from information about the health
benefits for exercise (a cognitive process) than they would from adding
cues or prompts to engage in exercise (a behavioural process). Certified
Personal Trainers need to work differently with clients who are in
different stages of change. They will need to tailor their use of BCTs
and recommendations to the clients' readiness to make positive changes
in their lives.]{.mark}

**Precontemplation**

[Individuals may be in the precontemplation stage because they are not
informed about the consequences of inactivity or they do not know about
the health benefits of exercise. Alternatively, they may have tried
before, failed to feel confident or maintain consistency, and have
become demoralized by their inability to stick with an exercise routine
in the past. These people may be categorized as being ambivalent to
exercise. Cognitive strategies may be the best option for those in the
precontemplation stage.]{.mark}

[Additionally, gaining knowledge and education may be exactly what some
individuals need to increase their perceived value of exercise.
Certified Personal Trainers should work to understand any perceived
negatives surrounding exercise and help clients dispel any myths. For
example, some clients may think resistance training requires hours spent
in the gym each day, so the fitness professional can teach them that
only 30 to 60 minutes of focused resistance programming 2 to 4 days per
week to gain significant health benefits are needed.]{.mark}

[That said, Certified Personal Trainers will not usually work with
people in the precontemplation stage as it pertains to beginning
exercise from a sedentary state. The simple act of walking into the gym
means a person is at least already thinking about making healthy life
changes. However, a client could still be in precontemplation as it
pertains to a progression in their program. For example, a potential
client could be in the maintenance stage for the goal of exercising two
times per week, but they could be in the precontemplation stage for a
progression to exercising three times per week to better meet
goals.]{.mark}

[Similarly, a client could be in precontemplation for starting
resistance training but already be in the action stage for aerobic
exercise and recreational physical activity.]{.mark}

**Contemplation**

[Because individuals in the contemplation stage are considering becoming
more active, fitness professionals can have a great deal of influence on
what they choose to do. Certified Personal Trainers need to be able to
listen to the needs and desires of those in the contemplation stage and
help them connect those goals with exercise-based solutions. People in
contemplation begin to see more value in exercise participation, but
misconceptions may still be present. In fact, an equal balance between
benefits and negatives (i.e., being of two minds about something) may
produce ambivalence. These individuals may not be ready to act
immediately, so Certified Personal Trainers need to support them in any
way that they can.]{.mark}

[Similar to precontemplation, education is one of the best strategies to
use with people in contemplation, because they sometimes just need more
information to boost their perceived value of an exercise program. For
these individuals, it is important to discuss ways to deal with their
perceived negatives surrounding exercise. Individuals in this stage of
change are also low in self-efficacy; they may want to do it but are not
sure they can, so they hesitate to start. Small achievable goals help
people in contemplation build self-efficacy and gain momentum.]{.mark}

**Preparation**

[People in the preparation stage are working on their plan to change.
They may have already joined a gym, or they may already exercise
sporadically but are planning to start a formal weekly exercise plan
within the next month. This is a stage where fitness professionals will
most likely meet the most individuals. They know they want to start
exercising, and they are making the right moves to join a club and
potentially even attend a personal training consultation. Individuals in
this stage may already partake in multiple forms of physical activity,
just without any form of structure or consistency.]{.mark}

[Fitness professionals can help clients plan when, where, and how to fit
exercise into their schedule. The preparation stage is all about
establishing a plan that clients feel confident they can follow.
Building intrinsic motivation for exercise is also important for
developing consistency in this group. For that reason, motivational
interviewing, which is discussed later in this chapter, can be a highly
beneficial BCT to use with all new potential clients, helping to uncover
their underlying desires and turn a plan into action.]{.mark}

**Action**

[Action is the stage in which clients have been consistently exercising
for up to 6 months. In this stage, it is important to not allow
short-term slip-ups to turn into a departure from the exercise program.
Fitness professionals should continue to discuss barriers to exercise
and help clients anticipate any potential roadblocks that could arise.
To help with this, specific plans should be put in place in advance if a
client misses a scheduled session with suggestions for maintaining
progress, such as supplying preplanned "emergency" workouts that they
can do from home.]{.mark}

TRAINING TIP

[If a client happens to cancel a session, the fitness professional
should do at least one of the following two things:]{.mark}

1.  [Ask the client when they would like to reschedule the
    session.]{.mark}

2.  [Prompt the client to make a plan for continuing to exercise in the
    interim, if the rescheduled session is not soon (within 24--48
    hours).]{.mark}

**Maintenance**

[Maintenance is the stage in which clients are consistently working to
maintain their active lifestyle, sticking to their exercise plans for 6
months or more. These individuals do not use cognitive change processes
as frequently as they would have in the action phase, and they are less
tempted to relapse. At this stage, their self-efficacy levels are
generally high. Individuals in the maintenance stage may use certain
behavioural strategies, such as inviting other people to exercise with
them or making plans to make up missed sessions, to avoid relapsing back
to earlier stages.]{.mark}

## Importance of effective communication skills

[Before considering specific techniques to improve adherence, the
Certified Personal Trainer should understand that the BCTs that help
improve exercise adherence are equally as important as the style of
delivery used and the relationship the fitness professional has built
with each client. In other words, it's not only *what* fitness
professionals say, but *how* they say it.]{.mark}

[Effective communication skills are crucial to further understand client
needs and build a trusting relationship. Good communicators should
strive to do the following:]{.mark}

- [Create a safe environment where challenging and emotional issues can
  be discussed.]{.mark}

- [Clear away distractions such as cell phones and focus on the
  client.]{.mark}

- [Ask questions to understand the meaning of what the person is
  saying.]{.mark}

- [Observe nonverbal cues such as body language.]{.mark}

- [Provide empathy and validation.]{.mark}

[Certified Personal Trainers should strive to achieve each of these
communication strategies, because their use can minimize disagreements
that may make the relationship with a client uncomfortable. By
maximizing support and minimizing disagreements, fitness professionals
will build rapport with the client, which can help contribute to
adherence to an exercise program.]{.mark}
