## Food choices

[The development of food choice behaviours is a complex process. It
evolves over time and is impacted by biological and genetic origins as
well as social, economic and personal experiences and choices. The
ability to experience flavour likely begins in the womb and continues to
change and adapt as the child grows and develops. Research has suggested
that children are hard-wired to prefer certain tastes, associating sweet
tastes as good and bitter tastes as bad. Children's preference for sweet
tastes is thought to be associated with an attraction to breast milk to
accelerate early growth and development. Children then naturally reject
bitter tastes as an instinctive measure to protect against ingesting
poisons. Further adoption of taste and food preferences are shaped by
socio-cultural, age, economic, geographical and biological
factors.]{.mark}

### Socio-cultural factors

[Socio-cultural food choices play a significant role in the development
of food preferences across the lifespan. For some cultures, the
preparation, serving, and consumption of food is a complex social and
personal experience. From growing and harvesting food to preparing and
celebrating meals together, food preferences and behaviours are learned
early on and persist throughout life. For others, food choices and
dietary behaviours have little social context; instead, it is just a
means of eating for survival. Both positive and negative social
influences can be linked to emotional eating and may lead to eating
disorders and obesity.]{.mark}

[Cultural influences can have both a significant impact on health,
nutrition and long-term health risks. Income inequality, limited access
to healthy foods, exercise habits and rapidly changing cultural shifts
due to increased globalization can all have an impact of diet choices
and both short- and long-term health outcomes. Diets that stress
lower-saturated fat foods and more fresh fruits and vegetables have
proven advantages, but may, in fact, be limited in some cultures due to
cultural preferences, social class and income inequality.]{.mark}

[Religion also influences food selection. Some other examples of the
diversity of religions' food preferences include the following:]{.mark}

- [Muslims who typically eat Halal (religiously lawful) foods,
  consisting of fruit, vegetables, eggs and meat farmed, slaughtered and
  prepared under strict criteria.]{.mark}

- [Hindus who are primarily lacto-vegetarian (avoiding most meat and
  eggs).]{.mark}

- [Sikhs who are also primarily vegetarian.]{.mark}

- [Jews who often follow Kosher dietary practices that are similar to
  Halal traditions.]{.mark}

[Some of the most common examples of social food preferences and
behaviours occur during the holidays. Meals during holidays like
American Thanksgiving, for example, are focused more on the social
experience rather than the health effects of the meal itself. The
average American consumes around 3000 calories on Thanksgiving for just
for dinner alone. After accounting for breakfast, snacks, drinks,
dessert, and appetizers, the total calorie count for the day can easily
exceed 5000 calories or more! For most people, it is not at all common
to regularly consume 5000 calories of high-fat, high-sugar foods;
however, in specific cultural situations, it can be normal and needs to
be considered as part of a more holistic nutritional strategy.]{.mark}

[How and where you were raised plays a significant role in food
preferences, whether you recognise it or not. Athletes may also have
unique dietary practices within the culture of their sport. For example,
team meals the night before a competition help to build team unity and
cohesion. And some families enjoy nearly all of their meals together,
which helps to build the strength and unity of the family unit as
well.]{.mark}

[As we age, our dietary habits may change. As metabolisms slow and less
energy is expended over the course of the day, we tend to need fewer
calories to survive. The secret to maintaining a healthy weight as we
age is to eat a health-supporting diet throughout the lifespan and
respond and adapt to change. Unfortunately, too few people have acquired
this skill.]{.mark}

[A poor diet is common among older people, mostly due to changing
economic and social conditions, such as the loss of a spouse. In
general, people tend to eat less as they get older. However, even with
slower metabolisms in later stages of life, it is still important for
everyone to eat a balanced diet that includes all necessary vitamins and
minerals for the appropriate life stage. For example, studies have shown
that older adults tend to have lower dietary intake of certain vitamins
and minerals, like calcium, iron, zinc, B vitamins and vitamin E, which
could accelerate diet-related illnesses or health problems.]{.mark}

[Various physiological changes, including the emptying of the stomach,
altered hormonal responses, slowing metabolism, changes to taste and
smell and lower physical activity all impact our food preferences later
in life. Older adults should be encouraged to consume less energy-dense
sweets and fast foods and choose a diet high in whole grains, lean
protein, healthy fats, vegetables and fruits. Other factors, such as
marital status, income, education and socio-economic status, likely play
a role in changes to food preferences and food selection as people get
older.]{.mark}
